## 1.3 The editorial board and the review procedure

To handle the increased number of datasets, and the resulting increased demand for quality control and review, an
editorial board has been established. It is made up of more than 50 editors, all experts in their fields. Each editor
covers an area of economic activity (e.g. agriculture, mining, chemicals production, etc.), a specific geographical
region, a specific type of emission, or specific database fields such as uncertainty, to ensure consistent reporting in
the datasets across different industrial activities. Each new dataset passes at least 3 editors, at least one for the
economic activity and at least two cross-cutting editors. The database administrator functions as chair of the editorial
board, which thereby functions as a critical review panel according to ISO 14040. The review process and all reviewer
comments are documented and stored by ecoinvent. The names and final review comments of the editors are stored in the
datasets. The current list of editors is available at the ecoinvent web-site.

## 1.4 Using ecoinvent version 3

There are many further, smaller changes in ecoinvent 3. The data quality guidelines describe these in detail, but the
summary in this chapter, and the general introductions and FAQs on the ecoinvent website, should provide you with
everything you need to know to start working with ecoinvent 3.

The most important aspect to understand from a user perspective is that there are now different implementations of the
ecoinvent database, referred to as system models. All system models are based on different fundamental assumptions and
linking rules, and results will therefore vary depending on the choice of system model. For users familiar and satisfied
with ecoinvent version 2, the system model “Allocation, ecoinvent default” will be the most appropriate. It is an
attempt at a consistent implementation of the modelling principles of ecoinvent version 2. By default, it allocates
exchanges from multi-output processes according to their revenue. However, the many updated and new datasets in version
3 will have changed the results to some extent compared to ecoinvent version 2. This is an effect independent of the
introduction of the system model approach and is a consequence of our continued efforts to expand and improve ecoinvent. For an overview of the system models in ecoinvent
version 3, please see Chapter14.
Apart from the choice of the system model, little will change for database users. If you access the Life Cycle Impact
Assessment results on the web-site or download them as Excel files, there will be no difference to working with the
previous version. Inventories include more details and information than in ecoinvent version 2, but will otherwise look
similar. The datasets can also be integrated into any software tool with import functionality for ecoSpold 2 files. We
have been working with leading LCA software providers to assist them in the implementation of the ecoSpold 2 format.

## 1.5 Supplying data to ecoinvent version 3

Our goal has been to make it more comfortable to provide high-quality data for version 3. If you are new to the idea of
supplying data to ecoinvent, you will appreciate the many beginner-friendly features included in the new ecoEditor
tool, the main tool to provide data to ecoinvent. The ecoEditor is a freeware that can be downloaded from the ecoinvent
web-site. Once you have submitted a dataset to ecoinvent via the ecoEditor, the feedback from the review is also shown
directly in the ecoEditor in a separate Review Comments view, while highlighting the commented field. In general, the
review process is streamlined and simpler than before, and the costs for data review are now covered by the ecoinvent
centre, no longer by the data provider. In some areas, additional data are now asked for, while some automatic
calculation, e.g. of uncertainty from the data quality scores and the automatic linking of datasets via markets, relieve
data providers from work that previously had to be done manually. The new features of ecoSpold 2 format allow data
providers to include their calculations in the datasets, giving them more control and more ways to ensure the
consistency of the data and giving the database users more insight into the origin of the data. Further information for
potential data suppliers can be found on the ecoinvent website.
