## 1.2.1    System models

Newly introduced is the distinction between the unlinked ecoinvent datasets and the linked system models. In the
ecoinvent database version 2, only one system model existed, following an attributional approach, using allocation rules
for multi-output processes according to the recommendations of the individual data providers. The difference in version
3 is that there are now several system models, all of which are used to create fully independent and self-contained
model implementations out of the same unlinked ecoinvent data. As an ecoinvent database user, your first important
choice is therefore to determine which system model you want to use, according to the goal and scope definition of your
project. The system model “Allocation, ecoinvent default” uses the same attributional approach as ecoinvent version 2.
The other main system model is “Substitution, consequential, long-term“, using substitution (also known as ‘system
expansion’) to substitute by-product outputs and taking into ac- count both constrained markets and technology
constraints. More system models are or will be made available for specialized use, e.g. “Allocation by revenue”, a model
consistently using economic data for allocation. It is vital to be aware of which system model version you are using in
your projects, and to communicate this openly when talking about results based on these data.
See Chapter 14for more information on the system models provided in ecoinvent version 3, and for recommendations on
which system model to choose for different application areas.

## 1.2.2    The linking of datasets into system models

To allow the application of different system models, the underlying ecoinvent database service layer
(see Chapter 3) has been expanded with the ability to automatically create the system model implementations out of the
unlinked ecoinvent datasets. For the ecoinvent database version 2, data provid- ers had to specify where their input of
e.g. cement came from. Sometimes, country-specific consump- tion mixes were created, but often the sources were directly
linked to the consuming process. For ecoinvent database version 3, it is sufficient to say where an activity is located,
e.g. USA, to allow the database service layer to determine that the input of cement must come from the U.S. market
activity dataset (basically an extended consumption mix, now available for each product in the database), which
describes the origins of cement consumed in the U.S. The inputs to the market activity dataset are calculated from the
production volumes of the various cement-supplying activities located within the boundary of the market, i.e. USA.
The database service layer can calculate both the average supply and – using additional information on the technology
level provided in each supplying dataset – the unconstrained supply, as used in con- sequential system models.
Market activities also include the transport types and distances required to supply a specific product, simplifying the
situation for data providers and allowing an easy, centralized way of updating the

## transport assumptions in ecoinvent. The ubiquitous transport inputs to production activities in version 2 have therefore disappeared, and most production activities now have no inputs of transport at all.

Note that direct linking of an input to a specific good or service from a specific activity is still possible – in these
cases transport is added manually, just like in version 2.
See Chapters4.3to4.9for more information on the functions of market activities in the ecoinvent database version 3.

## 1.2.3     Regionalisation

The ecoinvent database version 3 includes new features for improved support of regionalised inventories and impact
assessment. The new data format supports regions of any shape and size. Regional shapes are given by a series of
coordinates, but the database also allows the use of shortcut names, ranging from countries to states, watersheds, etc.
Should you require new regions to be defined, these can be created in a simple, free tool, available from the ecoinvent
web-site.

## 1.2.4     Parameterisation

The new ecoSpold 2 data format allows the use of formulas to calculate the amounts of flows and other entities in the
datasets. As a database user, you may encounter this when analysing unit processes; for example, the amount of carbon
dioxide emissions of a coal burning activity may be expressed as a function of the mass and carbon content of the coal
burned in the process. Calculations and models that were previously only available in the background can now be
incorporated into the datasets di- rectly. This enhances consistency, removes a potential source of errors, and reduces
database mainte- nance efforts. As a user, you are also able to directly observe the origins of the amounts in ecoinvent
datasets instead of simply seeing a number and having to refer to background reports for the reasoning behind the
number. During the calculation of aggregated system datasets or impact assessment results, the formulas are
automatically resolved. The use of parameterisation allows many exciting new op- tions for data providers and helps to
ensure the consistency and transparency of the database.

## 1.2.5    Global datasets

Many users have been missing international data in many areas of the ecoinvent database version 2. For ecoinvent version
3, we have prepared a framework for international datasets, to improve the in- ternational coverage of ecoinvent. One of
the steps we have taken is to ensure that all activities in the ecoinvent database have a global dataset covering the
average global production.
Such datasets existed also for some datasets in version 2 of ecoinvent; new is the step to introduce global datasets for
all activities covered by ecoinvent version 3. While we have made efforts to collect new data for these datasets and
these efforts are ongoing, it is important to realise that currently, many of these datasets are just extrapolated from
one of the existing, regional datasets. These datasets are described as extrapolated in their comments fields and it is
important to pay attention to the quality of these data. The increased uncertainty from these extrapolations is
quantified by the pedigree matrix approach, which is generally used in the ecoinvent database to describe uncertainty
resulting from less than perfect data quality. It is more important than ever to consider these uncertainties in your
work.
The decision to offer these global datasets was not an easy one. On the one hand, ecoinvent has always been dedicated to
high-quality data, and for those global datasets that are based solely on ex- trapolation, important information may be
missing. On the other hand, the widespread use of ecoin- vent version 2 in developing countries demonstrated the need
for a more consistent approach. Users in these countries often applied European datasets to their region without
adjusting the uncertainty in- formation. Clearly, global datasets with a true and transparent assessment of their data
quality are a better solution for these users. Meanwhile, users in regions well covered by high-quality data will not
be negatively influenced by these datasets. Ecoinvent version 3 therefore offers these extrapolated datasets, with the
goal of continuously improving their data quality.

## 1.2.6     Parent/child datasets and inheritance

The new ecoSpold 2 format allows inheritance between datasets: to create a dataset as a child of a parent dataset. This
approach is optional, but will be used for groups of closely related datasets. In ecoinvent 3, we only implement
inheritance for geography: A local dataset can be created as a child of the global parent dataset. But we will continue
to develop this feature and test its usefulness in other areas, especially to create datasets for time series and
scenarios.
Inheritance has the advantage that the child dataset inherits all flows from the parent unless otherwise specified –
ensuring consistency of datasets for the same activity in different regions. For example, the operation of a certain
type of truck can be described and edited only once in the global parent, while the German, Polish, Japanese, etc.,
datasets only report the difference to the global dataset. The database stores the parent dataset and the difference
datasets, and the child datasets are then calculat- ed by combining the parent dataset with a specific difference
dataset. Child datasets may inherit val- ues for flows, use parent values as a parameter in a formula, or replace parent
values entirely.
As a database user, you will most likely not come in contact with this concept much, since a calculated child dataset
will appear fully functional and self-contained, as any other dataset.
See Chapter4.2for more information on parent and child datasets.

## 1.2.7     No cut-offs

Ecoinvent version 2 followed the cut-off approach for modelling of recycling processes, in many cases cutting off
product flows of recyclable materials completely. As more data are now available on treatment and recycling processes,
the decision was made to abandon this approach and consistently seek to report all datasets as completely as possible,
including all by-products and potentially recycla- ble materials, and consistently include these in allocation and/or
substitution calculations.
See Chapters4.10and5.10for more information on recycling and cut-offs.
