# 1 Introduction to the ecoinvent database v3

This chapter offers a short introduction to the ecoinvent version 3 database. It begins by explaining the purpose of the
database and our reasons for updating the successful ecoinvent version 2 and intro- ducing a new version number. It then
describes the most important changes and fundamentally new concepts of version 3 in a brief summary, aimed especially at
users accustomed to the database version 2, referencing the more detailed descriptions in the following chapters . The
chapter ends with two sections on working with ecoinvent 3, the first from a user’s perspective, the second with addi-
tional information for data providers.

## 1.1 The purpose of the ecoinvent database

The Swiss Centre for Life Cycle Inventories (the ecoinvent Centre) has the mission to promote the use and good practice
of life cycle inventory analysis through supplying life cycle inventory (LCI) data to support assessment of the
environmental and socio-economic impact of decisions.
The strategic objective is to provide the most relevant, reliable, transparent and accessible LCI data for users
worldwide.
The ecoinvent database comprises LCI data covering all economic activities. Each activity dataset describes an
activity at a unit process level. The complete list of all names of datasets, elementary exchanges, and of all
regional codes is available at www.ecoinvent.org.
Consistent and coherent LCI datasets for different human activities make it easier to perform life cycle assessment (
LCA) studies, and increase the credibility and acceptance of the LCA results. The assured quality of the life cycle
data and the user-friendly access to the database are prerequisites to establish LCA as a reliable tool for
environmental assessment that will support an Integrated Product Policy. Data quality is maintained by a rigorous
validation and review system. The document at hand reports the data quality guidelines applied.
The ecoinvent LCI datasets are intended as background data for LCA studies where problem- and case-specific foreground
data are supplied by the LCA practitioner. The LCI and life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) results of ecoinvent
datasets may be used for comparative assessments with the aim to identify environmentally preferable goods or services,
but should not be used without considering the relevance and completeness of the data for the specific assessment.
The ecoinvent datasets may also be useful as background datasets for studies in material flow accounting and general
equilibrium modelling. The ecoinvent Centre is interested in a dialogue with such user groups, to improve the usability
of the datasets in such contexts outside the narrower LCA field.

## 1.2 Fundamental changes in version 3 & differences to version 2

Our starting point for the development of version 3 of the ecoinvent database was the successful version 2, and our
focus has been to ensure that version 3 will continue to satisfy the needs of LCA practitioners. At the same time, the
new version 3 should allow significant advancements concerning data management, globalisation, and flexibility. One of
the ways of achieving this was an overhaul of the underlying structure of ecoinvent. Since the initial versions of the
ecoinvent database, database management has grown more complex. To ensure that the database can continue to grow
without problems, several changes were implemented to allow an easier inclusion of new processes and alternative
system models into the database. Other changes facilitate future updates of data. The development of ecoinvent, from its
origins as a Swiss national database to a truly global database today, places new demands on the calculation software
and the data format. The ongoing discussion on different model-

ling approaches (e.g. allocation vs. substitution, average vs. unconstrained suppliers) highlights the need for a
flexible data structure that can easily be adapted to different modelling needs, while ensur- ing the consistency of the
ecoinvent data. And of course, version 3 continues to increase our supply of reliable and transparent inventory data.
For the development of ecoinvent version 3, the ecoSpold data format has been extended and updated, so while ecoinvent
version 1 and version 2 used the ecoSpold 1 data format, ecoinvent version 3 uses the ecoSpold 2 data format. The
specification of the new data format and a converter from ecoSpold 1 to ecoSpold 2 are available at www.ecoinvent.org,
along with the freeware ‘ecoEditor for ecoinvent version 3’, which allows users to view, create, and modify ecoSpold 2
files, and submit them for review. The update of the data format was necessary for the implementation of several new
concepts in the way data are stored and linked, such as:
