10    Uncertainty


Uncertainty expresses the general problem that an observed value can never be exactly reproduced, but when an adequate number of observations have been made, certain characteristic features of their distribution can be described, such as mean and standard deviation. A probability distribution is the mathematical and/or graphical function giving the probability that an observation will take a given value.
Many different concepts are used to describe uncertainty. When applicable, we use statistical terms as defined in ISO 3534. Uncertainty is the general term we use to cover any distribution of data within a population, caused by either random variation or bias.
Variation is the general term used for the random element of uncertainty. This is what is typically described in statistical terms as variance, spread, standard deviation etc., see definitions below. It is the randomness of the observations, which allows a statistical treatment, since this describes the probability distribution of the observations.
Bias is the skewness introduced into a distribution as a result of systematic (as opposed to random) errors  in the  observations,  e.g. when the  observations  are made  on  a  specific  sub-set  of a non- homogenous population.
The population  is  the  total  number  of items  under  consideration,  from which  only  a  sample  is typically observed. The arithmetic mean or average value is the sum of the observed values divided by the number of observations. The error of an observation is the deviation of the observed value from the mean value, i.e the value of the observation minus the mean value. Variance is a description of variation defined as the sum of the squares of the errors divided by the number of observations less 1. The standard deviation (G) is the positive square root of the variance. The median () is the value for which 50% of the distribution is smaller and 50% of the distribution is larger, also known as the 50% fractile.  The  mode  or  most  likely  value  is  the  value  that  has  the  largest  probability within  the distribution. A two-sided confidence interval is the central part of a distribution that lies between two values chosen so that the interval includes a required percentage of the total population. For example, a 95% confidence interval includes 95% of the population, i.e. it excludes 2.5% of the population on both extremes.
Table 10.1 shows how uncertainty information is reported in the ecoSpold 2 format, illustrated with some examples. In some cases, the values used for calculations which don’t consider uncertainty are not the average value of the distribution, like the mode for the triangular distribution. This effect is especially pronounced for the lognormal distribution, where static calculations use the median value. In these cases, it is the judgment of the ecoinvent Centre that the data available should be used to de- rive the most representative value of the distribution, even if this is not the mathematical average val- ue of the distribution. As the average value of a lognormal distribution is always higher than the me- dian value, the average value of a Monte Carlo LCA calculation where a large number of lognormal distributions are present will be biased higher than the static calculation result. Table 10.2 shows the values used in static calculations for the distributions in the Table 10.1.
The choice of distribution has limited influence on the overall uncertainty of a product system, since the aggregation of a large number of independent variables each with their distribution will always approach a result with normal distribution. This is called the “central limit theorem” . Many real life phenomena are caused by a large number of independent random effects, and the central limit theorem explains why we so often find real life data to be approximately normally distributed.
The normal distribution is a symmetrical distribution (as opposed to a skewed distribution, see the lognormal and triangular distributions below), which implies that the arithmetic mean, the median, and the mode all appear at the same place. An interesting feature of the normal distribution is that 68% of the data lies within one standard deviation either side of the mean, 95% of the data lies with



two standard deviations of the mean, and 99.7% of the data lies within three standard deviations of the
mean. Thus, it is easy to compare confidence intervals and standard deviations.

Table 10.1. Description of uncertainties in the ecoinvent database, with examples


EcoSpold data field	Probability function / parameter	Formula / symbol	Example	Unit	Database input
2100
2101

2102

2103

2104	Uncertainty type
geometricMean

AritmeticMeanOfLogtrans- formedData
varianceOfLogtransformed Data
varianceWithPedigreeUn- certainty	Lognormal
Median (geometric
mean)
Arithmetic mean of un-  derlying normal distribu- tion
Unbiased variance of the	
g


2
Qb

2
Q	
1540

7.3

0.25

0.46	
kg

-


-	1
1540

7.3

0.25

0.46
		underlying bution	normal distri-				
		Unbiased variance of the underlying normal distri- bution, basic uncertainty with pedigree uncertain- ty				
2110
2111
2112	Uncertainty type
meanValue
variance	Normal
Arithmetic mean
Unbiased variance	

2
Qb	
1540
44100	
kg
-	2
1540
44100
2120
2121
2122
2123	Uncertainty type
minValue
mostLikelyValue
maxValue	Triangular
Minimum value
Mode
Maximum value	
B
A
C	
930
1780
1910	
kg kg    kg	3
930
1780
1910
2130
2131
2132	Uncertainty type
minValue
maxValue	Uniform
Minimum value
Maximum value	
A
B	
1210
1870	
kg
kg	4
1210
1870
2140
2141
2142
2143	Uncertainty type
minValue
mostFrequentValue
maxValue	BetaPERT
Minimum value
Most frequent value
Maximum value	
a
m
b	
1210
1600
1870	
kg
kg
kg	5
1210
1600
1870
2150
2151
2152
2153	Uncertainty type
shape
scale
minValue	Gamma
Shape parameter           Scale parameter            Minimum value (location parameter)	
K
Θ
M	
3   1.5 2.5	
-
-
kg	6   3   1.5 2.5
2160
2161

2162	Uncertainty type
n
p	Binomial
Number of independent yes/no experiments      Probability of success	
N

P	
10

0.6	
-

-	7
10

0.6
2170
2171
2172
2173	Uncertainty type
minValue
maxValue
standardDeviation95	Undefined (range)
Minimum value              Maximum value             The value, extended      from both sides of the    mean, that would be      necessary to cover 95% of the population		
1    7   2.5	
kg
kg
kg	8   1   7   2.5




Table 10.2. Values used in static calculations, with examples


Uncertainty type	Statistical parameter	Value used (formula)	Example value (relating
to Table 10.1)
Lognormal	Median	µg	1540
Normal	Mean	µ	1540
Triangular	Mode	A	1780
Uniform	Mean	(B+A)/2	1540
BetaPERT	Mode	(a+4m+b)/6	1580
Gamma	Mean	KΘ + M	7
Binomial	Mean	NP	6
Undefined (range)		(Minimum + maximum)/2	4

The  lognormal  distribution  is  a  the  probability  distribution  where  the  natural  logarithm  of the observed values are normally distributed. The lognormal distribution is the predominant distribution used to model uncertainties in the Ecoinvent database for a number of reasons:
    The lognormal distribution is frequently observed in real life populations (Koch 1966). One
reason for this is that many real life effects are multiplicative rather than additive, and in parallel to the central limit theorem for additive effects, it can be shown that multiplicative effects will result in a lognormal distribution.
    Most parameters for real life populations are always positive, and this constraint will result in
a skewed distribution with a longer tail towards the higher values.
    The standard deviation of the underlying normal distribution is scale independent. This means
that for a lognormally distributed vector of random values X, multiplying by a constant a does not change the standard deviation, also not the standard deviation of the underlying normal distribution:
Q = stdev(lnX)
stdev(ln [aX]) = stdev(lna+lnX) = stdev(lnX)

As for the normal distribution, confidence intervals are related to the geometric standard deviation, but for the lognormal distribution, this relation is multiplicative: 68% of the data lies in the interval 	/g to g, 95% of the data lies in the interval /g2 to g2, and 99.7% of the data lies in the interval 	/g3  to g3, where the median () is equal to the geometric mean g . The geometric mean is the nth root of the product of n observed values.
For backwards compatibility reasons, an “undefined” range distribution is also provided, with fields minimum, maximum, and standard deviation 95. Many distributions can be transformed to be repre- sented by each other.
The probability distribution functions for all defined distributions in Table 10.1 are: Lognormal:
(ln x一)2
f (x) = x2几 e    2



Normal:

f (x) =  e   2G2
Triangular:
(       2(x - A)      
(B - A)(C - A)    for A 三 x 三 C
|      2(B - x)     
| (B - A)(B - C)
|
|         0                  otherwise l
Uniform:
f (x) = 
BetaPERT:
m - a
a = 1+ 4
b - a
b = 6 -a
f (x) =  xa-1 (1- x)b-1
Gamma:
f (x) = xk -1 
Binomial:
f (x) = px (1- p )n-x


The ecoSpold 2 format allows the entry of uncertainty information, not only for the amounts of ex- changes, but also for exchange properties, parameters, and transfer coefficients. This allows the re- porting of the uncertainty on the primary data, which is of particular interest when the exchange amount is calculated by a mathematical relation involving these properties, parameters or coefficients.
The uncertainty of the exchange can then be calculated from the uncertainty on its components.       In the ecoinvent database, two kinds of uncertainty are quantified for the amounts of the exchanges:
.    Variation and stochastic error of the values which describe the exchanges, due to e.g. measure- ment uncertainties, activity specific variations, temporal variations, etc. This is expressed in the basic uncertainty. When relevant information to completely describe an activity in detail is una- vailable, so that the exchanges are only reported in an unspecific way or at a high aggregation level of activities, the average data applied, with inadequate specification of important exchanges, will have a basic uncertainty that reflects the lack of knowledge on their precise nature.



    Uncertainty due to use of estimates, lacking verification, incompleteness in the sample, or extrap-
olation from temporally, spatially and/or technologically different conditions. For instance, if the electricity consumption of an activity that takes place in Nigeria is approximated with the dataset of the South African electricity consumption mix. These aspects of uncertainty would be reflected in the additional uncertainty in the approximated Nigerian dataset, estimated via data quality indi- cators; see Chapter10.2.
Additional advice for data providers:
When the exchange amount is calculated by a mathematical relation purely consisting of references to other primary datapoints (amounts, properties, parameters), uncertainty need only to be added for the primary datapoints. [Feature considered for implementation later: The uncertainty of the calculat- ed amount will then be calculated automatically in the ecoEditor software, using a Monte Carlo simu- lation. This calculation includes the additional uncertainty and results in an assumed lognormally dis- tributed basic uncertainty without additional uncertainty. If the mathematical relation itself has addi- tional model uncertainty, the pedigree scores (see Table  10.4) can be manually adjusted to reflect this.]

10.1    Default values for basic uncertainty
If the sample data are available, the probability distribution and standard deviation of the sample can be calculated directly. If the sample is small, an approximate standard deviation can be calculated from the range (the difference between the largest and the smallest observed value). For the normal distribution, the range is approximately 3, 4, and 5 times the standard deviation when the sample size is 10, 30, and 100, respectively. Life cycle data often result from a small number of observations, so it is reasonable to use the factor 3 when the number of observations is unknown.
Quite often the uncertainty of a specific value cannot be derived from the available information, when there is only one source of information and this only provides only a single value without any infor- mation about the uncertainty of this value. A simplified standard procedure was developed to quantify the uncertainty for these (quite numerous) cases.
The lognormal distribution is always assumed when applying the simplified standard procedure.
Table  10.3 gives basic uncertainty factors (variances of the underlying normal distribution to the lognormal distribution) are given for various types of exchanges. It is assumed that different types of exchanges differ in their uncertainty. For instance, CO2  emissions show in general a much lower un- certainty than CO emissions. While the former can be calculated from fuel input, the latter is much more dependent on boiler characteristics, engine maintenance, load factors etc. The basic uncertainty factors are based on expert judgements.
For some ecoinvent datasets, different approaches have been used. These approaches are described in the respective datasets.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: In version 2, the confidence factor (the square of the geo- metric standard deviation of the lognormal distribution) was used in default uncertainty calculations. In version 3, the variance of the underlying normal distribution is used, which is mathematically iden- tical, but closer to the format used with original data. This change was made to reduce the complexity of the formula for calculating the standard deviation, and to keep the parameters describing uncertain- ty in the same framework as the parameters that describe the distribution itself, i.e. all are directly re- lated to the underlying normal distribution.]



Table 10.3. Default basic uncertainty (variance Gb2  of the logtransformed data, i.e. the underlying normal distribution) applied to  intermediate and elementary exchanges when no sampled data are available; c: combustion emissions; p: process emissions; a: agricultural emissions

input / output group	c	p	a	input / output group	c	p	a
demand of:
thermal energy, electricity, semi-finished prod-   ucts, working material, waste treatment services transport services (tkm)
Infrastructure	
0.0006
0.12
0.3	
0.0006
0.12
0.3	
0.0006
0.12
0.3	pollutants emitted to air:

CO2
SO2
NMVOC total
NOX, N2O
CH4 , NH3
Individual hydrocarbons
PM>10
PM10

PM2.5
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH)
CO, heavy metals
Inorganic emissions, others        Radionuclides (e.g., Radon-222)	
0.0006
0.0006 0.04    0.04    0.04    0.04    0.04    0.12
0.3

0.3
0.65	
0.0006





0.12
0.04
0.12
0.3



0.04
0.3	




0.03  0.008
resources:
Primary energy carriers, metals, salts
Land use, occupation
Land use, transformation	
0.0006 0.04
0.12	
0.0006 0.04
0.12	
0.0006 0.002
0.008				
pollutants emitted to water:
BOD, COD, DOC, TOC, inorganic compounds (NH4 , PO4 , NO3 , Cl, Na etc.)
Individual hydrocarbons, PAH
Heavy metals
Pesticides
NO3 , PO4		
0.04

0.3
0.65	




0.09
0.04
0.04				
pollutants emitted to soil:
Oil, hydrocarbon total
Heavy metals
Pesticides		
0.04
0.04	

0.04
0.033	


10.2   Additional uncertainty via data quality indicators
In addition to the basic uncertainty, either measured or estimated from Table 10.3, an additional un- certainty from data quality indicators is added to the lognormal distribution. These additional uncer- tainties are based on a pedigree matrix approach, taking pattern from work published by Weidema & Wesnaes (1996) and Weidema (1998).
Data sources are assessed according to the five independent characteristics "reliability", "complete- ness", "temporal correlation", "geographic correlation", and "further technological correlation" (see Table 10.4). Each characteristic is divided into five quality levels with a score between 1 and 5. Ac- cordingly, a set of five indicator scores is attributed to each individual input and output exchange (ex- cept the reference products) reported in a data source. Table 10.4 is called a pedigree matrix (after Funtowicz & Ravetz 1990) since the data quality indicators refer to the history or origin of the data, like a genealogical table reports the pedigree of an individual.
Overall uncertainty is increased by the addition of normal distributions to the underlying normal dis- tribution derived from the basic uncertainty. A normal uncertainty distribution is attributed to each score of the five characteristics. Each of these distributions has a mean value of zero, and a variance based on expert judgement, and shown in Table 10.5.



Table 10.4. Pedigree matrix used to assess the quality of data sources, modified from Weidema 1998)


Indicator
score	1	2	3	4	5 (default)
Reliability	5
Verified  data based
6
on measurements	Verified data partly      based on assumptions
or non-verified data based on measure- ments	Non-verified data part- ly based on qualified   estimates	Qualified estimate     (e.g. by industrial ex- pert)	Non-qualified estimate
Completeness	Representative data    from all sites relevant  for the market consid- ered, over an ade-       quate period to even   out normal fluctuations	Representative data    from >50% of the sites relevant for the market considered, over an    adequate period to      even out normal fluc-  tuations	Representative data   from only some sites   (<<50%) relevant for   the market considered or >50% of sites but   from shorter periods	Representative data  from only one site rel- evant for the market   considered or some   sites but from shorter periods	Representativeness    unknown or data from a small number of       sites and from shorter periods
Temporal  cor- relation	Less than 3 years of difference to the time period of the dataset	Less than 6 years of difference to the time period of the dataset	Less than 10 years of difference to the time period of the dataset	Less than 15 years of difference to the time period of the dataset	Age of data unknown  or more than 15 years of difference to the     time period of the da- taset
Geographical correlation	Data from area under study	Average data from   larger area in which  the area under study is included	Data from area with similar production   conditions	Data from area with    slightly similar produc- tion conditions	Data from unknown or distinctly different area (North America in-       stead of Middle East,  OECD-Europe instead of Russia)
Further   tech- nological  cor- relation	Data from enterprises, processes and mate-  rials under study	Data from processes and materials under study (i.e. identical   technology) but from different enterprises	Data from processes and materials under study but from differ- ent technology	Data on related pro- cesses or materials	Data on related pro-   cesses on laboratory  scale or from different technology














5 Verification may take place in several ways, e.g. by on-site checking, by recalculation, through mass balances or cross-checks with other sources.
6   Includes calculated data (e.g. emissions calculated from inputs to an activity), when the basis for calculation is measurements (e.g. measured inputs). If the calculation is based partly on assumptions, the score would be 2 or 3.






Table 10.5. Uncertainty factors (variances of the underlying normal distributions) used to convert the data quality indi- cators of the pedigree matrix in Table 10.4 into additional uncertainty.

Indicator score		1		2	3	4	5	
Reliability		0.000		0.0006	0.002	0.008	0.04	
Completeness		0.000		0.0001	0.0006	0.002	0.008	
Temporal correlation		0.000		0.0002	0.002	0.008	0.04	
Geographical correlation		0.000		2.5e-5	0.0001	0.0006	0.002	
Further technological correlation		0.000		0.0006	0.008	0.04	0.12	

Since each normal distribution is assumed to be independent, i.e. their covariance is zero, the variance of the summed final distribution is then:
G2 (X + Y) = G2 (X)+G2 (Y)+ 2cov(X, Y)
6
G2  =  G2 n
n=1
with:
G2 1 : basic uncertainty (variance measured or estimated according to Table 10.3)
G22 : uncertainty factor (variance) of reliability distribution
G23 : uncertainty factor (variance) of completeness distribution
G24 : uncertainty factor (variance) of temporal correlation distribution
G25 : uncertainty factor (variance) of geographical correlation distribution
G26 : uncertainty factor (variance) of other technological correlation distribution


Outlook: A separate ecoinvent project is ongoing to provide a better empirical basis for the uncertain- ty factors in Table 10.5. The preliminary results show that the current uncertainty factors for reliabil- ity and technological correlation may be too low.]
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The pedigree matrix has been slightly revised compared to version 2, and entries added for score 4 of geographical correlation and score 2 of technological corre- lation. In the ecoinvent 2 datasets, it was not possible to store the basic uncertainty separately. There- fore, the basic uncertainties have been back-calculated from the calculated additional uncertainty and the data quality uncertainty factors.]

10.3    Limitations of the uncertainty assessment
The approach for the assessment of uncertainties does not take into account the following factors that also contribute to the overall uncertainties:
.    Model uncertainty: The model used to describe a unit process may be inappropriate (e.g. using linear instead of non-linear modelling).
.    Mistakes imposed by human errors, i.e. human errors included in the information source used or errors made by the data provider during modelling, and not caught by the subsequent validation and review (see Chapter11).




10.4    Monte-Carlo simulation and results
The uncertainty estimations are given for each data point on the unit process level. The 95 % confi- dence interval of cumulative LCI results is calculated with the help of Monte-Carlo simulation. The 2.5 % and the 97.5 % values, calculated with Monte-Carlo simulation, are shown for each individual elementary exchange of the LCI results. [Feature considered for implementation later: The display of uncertainty information for the accumulated LCI results may be resumed.]
The average probabilistic mean values (i.e. the cumulative results determined with Monte Carlo simu- lation) differ from the deterministic cumulative results. This difference occurs because deterministic cumulative results are not always calculated with the mean values of the underlying uncertainty dis- tributions. For the lognormal distribution, deterministic calculations are made with the geometric mean (which is also the median); for the triangular distribution, deterministic results are calculated with the mode. It was decided to display the deterministic results in the ecoinvent database results, because they are regarded as more reliable than the probabilistic mean values often based on roughly estimated distribution parameters. In the case of the lognormal distribution, the geometric mean will always be less than the arithmetic mean; for the triangular distribution, there is no a priori relationship between the mode and the mean.
For the time being no uncertainty values are shown in the impact assessment results. Current impact assessment methods (except i.e. Goedkoop & Spriensma 2000; Huijbregts 2001; Steen 1999) often do not provide uncertainty information. The contribution of the uncertainty in the damage factors to the overall impact assessment results is judged to be at least as important as the uncertainty in the LCI re- sults. Showing uncertainty values on the level of LCIA results without considering the LCIA uncer- tainties would be misleading.
