## 4.2 Global reference activity datasets and parent/child

relationships between datasets
The geographical, temporal, and technological scope of the datasets is described in each individual dataset. Some
datasets are extrapolated on the basis of data from another geography or year. Such ex- trapolations are described in
the datasets, and will result in these datasets having a larger reported un- certainty.
To avoid artificial introduction of differences between datasets for the same technology, each tech- nology is described
in the form of a global reference activity dataset, intended to be close to the glob- al average for the activity for
the most recent year for which data is available. Other datasets for the same technology, but for specific geographical
locations, can then be described in child datasets, us- ing the reference activity dataset as parent dataset. In this
way, an improved description in the refer- ence activity dataset will automatically be transferred to the specific
datasets, while geographical dif- ferences can be reported in these.
The ecoinvent data network does not require non-global activity datasets to be described as child da- tasets, but data
providers are encouraged to consider the advantages of supplying the data in this form.

More details on the implementation of parent/child dataset inheritance and the restrictions applied to this feature are
provided in Annex B, including a description of the options for using inheritance to provide forecasted data by creating
child datasets for future time periods and/or different macro- economic scenario settings.

Additional advice for data providers:
Data providers that supply data for a specific local, non-reference activity, for which a global reference dataset for
the same time period does not yet exist, are required to provide such a global reference dataset, but this does not have
to be different from the non-reference dataset, if only data for the specific local non-reference activity is available.
Although such data providers are encouraged to consider providing a more representative global refer- ence dataset, data
providers may as a default assume that the non-reference dataset is representative for the global situation, if no
better data are available. It is recommended to simultaneously consider the global and the local dataset for the
activity and to consider which specific data are most relevant to add to each of these datasets. It may be most simple
at first to create a stand-alone local dataset with the available data and in a second step split it up in the global
parent and the local child, which will then supersede the stand-alone dataset. It is also recom- mended to consider
existing global and other local datasets for the same activity and to adapt the flow lists of new submissions to match
the existing datasets or to harmonize them. If a local activity features flows not present in other regions and the
global average, the situation can clearly not reflect reality, and data providers are urged to adapt the data to best
fit the actual situation.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The option to apply inheritance is new. Existing geograph- ically differentiated datasets will not be changed to child datasets automatically. The decision to do so rests with the active dataset author. There is no requirement to use the inheritance option, but dataset authors are asked to consider revising the reference activity dataset to be more appropriate as a global reference, and to implement corresponding child datasets.]

### 4.2.1 Geographical localisation

The geographical location of an activity can be:
At one or more specific points, when the location of specific production facilities is known. Along one or more lines,
e.g. for transport activities.
Within one or more areas, as in farming, fishery and forestry, or when the location of the specific
activity is unknown
Each geographical location (whether point-, line-, or area-based) is described by a short, unique name that links via a
unique identifier to a more detailed description for each location, see Chapter 9.9. As part of the detailed
description, the location is described in terms of geographical information system coordinates (longitude, latitude) in
the Keyhole Markup Language (KML) used by e.g. Google Earth. KML is an open standard regulated by the Open Geospatial
Consortium (www.opengeospatial.org). This allows the database to identify which activities are located within a given
area, and thus to link the activities to their geographically defined markets (see Chapter 4.4) and to flexibly provide
geo- graphically differentiated data for site-dependent impact assessment methods.
The geographical location indicated in this way is the location for which the dataset is intended to be valid. The data
may be originally collected for a different geographical location, and inter- or extra- polated to the geography of
validity. Such extrapolations are described in the dataset under “Extrapo- lations” .
To ensure completeness, the ecoinvent database contains a global reference activity dataset (a dataset with the
geographical setting “Global”) for each of the included activities.
Geography child datasets may be constructed for any geographical location by entering a geographical location in a delta
dataset referring to the corresponding reference dataset (using the “parentActivity-Id” field of the ecoSpold format).
This implies that the parent dataset of a geography child dataset is always the
global dataset for the same time period.
To avoid double-counting, overlapping geographical areas for datasets for the same activity are not allowed in the
ecoinvent database, except that
A global dataset is allowed to co-exist with datasets for smaller areas.
Production and supply mixes (see Chapter 4.5) can be established for any area of interest, since
these mixes are not used in further modelling.
All point and line locations belong to an area. This implies that a point location cannot be placed on the border of an
area, a line location cannot be placed along (on top of) borders (but may cross bor- ders, i.e. belong to more than one
area), and a border cannot be placed exactly on top of a point or along a line location. For the purposes of ecoinvent,
locations are recorded with a maximum resolu- tion of 0.001 degrees (about 100 meters at the equator, smaller towards
the poles).
When a global dataset is the only dataset in the database for a given activity, time period, and macro- economic
scenario, this global dataset is included like any other dataset in automatically calculated production, supply, or
consumption mixes, interlinked and aggregated system datasets.
When both a global dataset and one or more non-global datasets are available for the same activity, time period, and
macroeconomic scenario:
The global dataset is not included in any of the above-mentioned calculations, but can serve as a
parent dataset for other datasets.
A dataset with the geographical location Rest-Of- World (ROW) can be calculated as the residual
difference between the global dataset and the non-global datasets, when all datasets are scaled to the production volume
of their reference product. In the ecoinvent database, this calculation is performed automatically.
[At the time of the release of version 3.0: When new local data have been added after the initial generation of a global dataset, the global dataset should ideally be updated in order to remain repre- senting the global average. This updating has therefore not always done. In some cases this leads to negative amounts for some exchanges in the subsequently generated ROW datasets. Since such nega- tive amounts are obviously artefacts, they are automatically eliminated by setting the amounts to zero instead, and marking this in the comment field. In some cases the discrepancies between global da- tasets and the sum of local datasets were handled with a procedural exception in which the ROW da- taset has been created as a direct copy of the GLO dataset, i.e. without the above-described averaging procedure. This option is only used sparingly as a solution supervised by the ecoinvent LCI Expert Group, since it creates an inconsistency between the production-volume-weighted sum of all datasets and that provided by original the global dataset. All datasets generated with this exception are listed in the Change report (Moreno Ruiz et al. 2013).]
Additional advice for data providers:
Since the ecoinvent database does not allow overlapping datasets, adding a dataset (whether point-, line-, or area-
based) fully located within the geographical area of an existing dataset for the same activity, is effectively a
disaggregation of the existing dataset, and requires that the existing dataset is modified to represent the residual of
the
original dataset, in terms of geography, production volume, and otherwise.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The use of KML, and the options for automatic dataset handling that this provides, is new. All ecoinvent v2 geographies have been defined in KML in the new geographies master file. For version 2, geographical location was sometimes used as proxy for a specific technology. Such instances have been identified as far as possible and the original authors in- volved in suggesting or reviewing corrections, so that geographical location is no longer used as proxy for anything else.]

### 4.2.2 Temporal specification and time series

The time period for which an activity dataset is valid is described as an interval with a start date and an end date (
e.g. 2005-01-01 and 2005-12-31). Datasets valid for whole years can be specified by the year(s) alone. Time periods of
less than one year are currently not used in the ecoinvent database. Re- curring time periods, such as peak seasons or
peak hours, are distinguished by the activity name and product name.
The time period indicated in this way is the time period for which the dataset is intended to be valid. The data may be
originally collected for a different time period, and inter- or extra-polated to the time period of validity. Such
extrapolations are described in the dataset under “Extrapolations” .
When calculating production, supply, or consumption mixes, interlinked datasets and aggregated sys- tem datasets,
datasets from the same time period are linked. If a global dataset for an activity is miss- ing for a specific time
period, the activity dataset for the nearest preceding time period is applied.
To avoid double-counting, overlapping time periods for datasets for the same activity and geograph- ical location is not
allowed.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The option to have several temporal versions of the same dataset, and that separate linking is performed of datasets from the same time period, are new. How- ever, for the basic implementation of the database, only the current year will be calculated, using the most recent data available for each activity and geography. Time series and calculation results for specific years may be provided as a separate database product. When datasets are extrapolated to the current year from datasets for earlier years, the original temporal setting is placed as text in the field “extrapolations” and the pedigree is automatically adjusted to reflect the correct additional uncertain- ty. A few datasets for emerging technologies in the database version 2, with the suffix “future” in their name, have not had their time period changed and still carry the word “future” in the name field.]

### 4.2.3 Macro-economic scenarios

A macroeconomic scenario setting provides an option to have more than one dataset describing the same activity, for the
same geographical location and time period. Macroeconomic scenarios are only relevant for datasets for future years,
since datasets for the current and historical years are intended to reflect the actual known situation.
The ecoinvent database currently operates with one default reference scenario only: “Business-as-
Usual” . The introduction of new macroeconomic scenarios in the ecoinvent database is only done
centrally after a decision by the ecoinvent Centre. More details on this can be found in Chapter11.2.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The option to add macro-economic scenarios for datasets for future years is new. However, this feature is not applied for the calculation results of the basic im- plementation of the database, but may be provided as a separate database product.]
