# 4.3 Market activities and transforming activities

The ecoinvent database (and the ecoSpold 2 data format) distinguishes a number of special activity
types, including market activities, production and supply mixes (see Chapter 4.5), import and export activities (see
Chapter11.5), and correction datasets (see Chapter11.7).
All activities that are not of these special types are “ordinary” transforming activities. Transforming activities are
human activities that transform inputs, so that the output of the activity is different from the inputs, e.g. a hard
coal mine that transforms hard coal in ground to the marketable product hard coal. In contrast, market activities do not
transform their inputs, but simply transfer the intermediate output from a transforming activity to the transforming
activities that consume this intermediate out- put as an input, e.g. from hard coal at the supplier to hard coal at the
consumer.

Transforming activities are here understood in the widest possible sense, including extraction, produc- tion, transport,
consumption and waste treatment activities, i.e. any human activity where the interme- diate output is different from
the intermediate input. The concept “transforming activities” is intro- duced here simply to distinguish – in the
further modelling and linking of activities; see Chapter4.4–
these “ordinary” activities from the market activities, production and supply mixes, import and export activities, and
correction datasets.
Market activities typically mix similar intermediate outputs from different transforming activities. Market activities
therefore supply consumption mixes of the intermediate outputs. The term consump- tion mix is not part of the name of
the output, but is a consequence of the activity being a market ac- tivity (as specified in the ecoSpold field 115
specialActivityType). However, in graphical presenta- tions (see Figure 4.2) the term (consumption mix) in brackets may
be added after the name of the out- put. When only one transforming activity is supplying a specific intermediate output
to a market, the term consumption mix may seem a bit strange, but is nevertheless maintained for consistency reasons.

Market for
product X
(Market activity)

Figure 4.2. A market activity with its intermediate exchanges. Texts in brackets are not part of the name of the ex-
change.
Market activities may be global or geographically delimited, as indicated by the ecoSpold field 410 locationShortname.
As a default, markets are assumed to be global, since this is the most general situ-
ation, unless specific information is available to justify a geographical market boundary. The delimita-
tion of markets, and their justification, is described in more detail in Chapter4.4.
In its simplest form, a market dataset consists of a reference product, representing a consumption mix, and one or more
inputs of the same product from the different transforming activities that are located within the geographical
delimitation of the market. The ecoinvent database service layer automatically identifies these transforming activities
based on the name of the reference product and the geograph- ical location of the transforming activity, links the
product inputs to the market from each transform- ing activity by adding the corresponding ActivityLinkId (ecoSpold
field 1520), calculates the amount of input from each transforming activity in proportion to its available production
volume, based on the
entries in the ecoSpold field 1530 productionVolumeAmount of each transforming activity (see Chap- ter 5.4), and sums up
these production volumes, which then becomes the production volume of the market activity. A market dataset can only be
created if the resulting production volume is larger than zero.
In addition to providing consumption mixes of the intermediate outputs from different transforming activities, market
activities play a role in adding average transport activities (Chapter4.6), wholesaler and retailer activities (
Chapter4.7), and product losses in trade and transport. Product losses in trade and transport are added to the market
activity datasets as waste outputs. To balance the waste output, an equivalent amount of product input is added. Since
the loss is an average of the products traded, this compensating input is the consumption mix, i.e. the output of the
market activity itself. Losses of

a specific input to the market are recorded in the specific supplying activity. The mentioned activities and losses also
imply economic costs to the market activities and - together with product taxes and
subsidies - these costs change the prices of the products from the basic prices of the inputs to the pur-
chaser’s prices of the outputs (Chapter5.6.5).
Market activities are placed in between any two transforming activities, unless a direct link is made between two
specific transforming activities, thus avoiding the market (see Chapter4.4). This implies that market activities may
also be placed within an enterprise if the enterprise performs several sepa- rate, subsequent activities in the life
cycle of a product. This depends entirely on the level of detail to which the transforming activities are represented (
see also Chapter 5.1). In such cases, the markets should be understood as enterprise-internal markets, i.e. as supplying
reference products between dif- ferent parts or production lines of the same enterprise. This degree of sub-division in
LCI data is only relevant if the product could alternatively be used outside the enterprise (or be supplied from outside
the enterprise).
Additional advice for data providers:
Data providers to the ecoinvent database are not required to supply market datasets. When missing, a simple, global
market dataset will be auto-generated by the database service layer, including default values for price, transport,
trade margins, and product losses per product
group. [Feature considered for implementation later: The auto-generated global market dataset may also include default prices, trade margins and product losses.]
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: A market dataset is now required for every reference product. When missing, a simple market dataset will be auto-generated by the database service layer. The editor for trade reviews existing market datasets for consistency.]

## 4.4 Linking transforming activities directly or via markets

### 4.4.1 Direct links between transforming activities

Goods and service inputs to a transforming activity are described in terms of the product name. Fur- thermore, a
specific supplier of this product may be indicated (in the ecoSpold field 1520 Activity- LinkId), if the input is linked
to this specific supplier. This may be the case if a specific group of en- terprises are so closely linked in a supply
chain that the production volumes of the specific suppliers can be shown to fluctuate with the demand of the specific
customers. Examples of this situation are:
When products do not store or transport easily, or have a low price compared to their weight, so
that transport costs prohibit all other than the local producers . Examples are thermal heat, chlorine gas, and straw
for heat and power production, where only the farmers closest to the power plant will supply the straw. Other examples
of this can be found in the forestry sector and the building- and glass-industries.
When two or more companies are tied together by tradition, or when a supplier has developed its
product to meet specific demands of the customer. An example is an aluminium industry that spe- cifically co-locates
with a specific electricity source.
When the choice of supplier is not subject to normal market conditions.
The reason for linking directly to a specific supplying activity is provided in the comment field for the linked
exchange.
When transforming activities are linked directly, thus avoiding the market activities, the activities and data that are
normally included with the market activities, are instead added directly to the activity re- quiring the input. This
includes transport activities, production losses, wholesaler and retailer activi- ties, and product taxes and subsidies
for the directly linked input.

[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: In version 2, all datasets were linked directly and no spe- cific justification for this was required. In version 3 direct links require a justification.]

### 4.4.2 Linking via markets

As a default, when there is no information available to justify the placement of a direct link to reflect that the
production volumes of a specific supplier (or group of suppliers) fluctuate with the demand of the specific customers,
it is assumed that the input is provided by the local market. When no specific supplier is specified for the product
input (in the ecoSpold field 1520 ActivityLinkId), the ecoinvent database automatically provides the specific link to
the local market, i.e. the market that geographical- ly is equal to or covers the activity that demands the input. If
the activity is defined for a geography or time that spans over more than one local market, each of the market
activities contribute in proportion to their production volume.
Markets are typically differentiated
geographically,
temporally, and
in customer segments.

### 4.4.3 Geographical market segmentation

The geographical segmentation of markets may be determined by differences in:
Natural geography (climate, landscape, transport distances etc.)
Regulation or administration  (regulation of competition and market transparency, legislative
product requirements, product standards, taxes, subsidies)
Consumer culture.
Geographical segments are identified and documented (in the ecoSpold field 420 Geography com- ment) by the lacking or
constrained import of the product across the geographical boundary.
Three situations can be distinguished:
No import, no export: The geographical segment is modelled by a single market activity for the
geographical area.
No import, but no restrictions on export: In addition to the market activity for the geographical
area (X), the exports from this market to other markets are specified as separate transforming ac- tivities “product Y,
import from market X” with the geographical specification of the receiving market and with direct links (specified in
ecoSpold field 1520 ActivityLinkId) to the consumption mix of market X.
Administratively constrained import: The contribution of import is modelled separately and added
as an input to the market activity for the geographical area.
The three situations are described in more detail in Chapter 11.5, where the linking of geographical markets is
discussed.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: Non-global market activities (consumption mixes) now require a justification.]

### 4.4.4 Temporal market segmentation

Temporal segmentation of markets is common for service products (e.g. peak hours and night hours in electricity
consumption, rush hours in traffic and telecommunication, seasons in the tourist industry). For physical goods, markets
are generally only segmented temporally when adequate supply or stor- age capacity is missing, either due to the nature
of the product (e.g. food products), or due to imma- ture or unstable markets, as can been found for treatment of some
recycled materials.
Although the ecoSpold format allows time periods to be specified at a higher resolution than years, the format does not
have any way to specify recurring time periods such as peak hours that occur at the same time every day. Temporal
markets are therefore specified as part of the product name, e.g. “electricity, peak” and “electricity, non-peak” as
opposed to an average “electricity” . At the time of publication of the database version 3.0, the ecoinvent database
does not include temporal market seg- ments, but data providers are not restricted from contributing such data when
available.
The temporal segmentation should be distinguished from the fact that markets generally develop in time, e.g. governed by
developments in fashion and technology, and that both geographical and tem- poral segmentation and customer segmentation
therefore may change over time. In general, there is a tendency for markets to become more transparent and
geographically homogenous with time, but at the same time more segmented with regard to customer requirements and thus
product differentiation.

### 4.4.5 Customer segmentation

Customer segmentation within each geographical market is defined in terms of clearly distinct func- tion-based
requirements, i.e. based on the needs fulfilled by the products rather than based on the physical products themselves.
This can be expressed in terms of the obligatory product properties, i.e. properties that the product must have in order
to be at all considered as a relevant alternative. Very similar products may serve different needs and hence serve
different markets. And very different products may serve the same need, thus being in competition on the same market.
As for temporal markets, customer segments are expressed in the name of the product, so that each customer segment has
its own product. The name includes as far as possible all relevant aspects of the obligatory product properties. Product
properties may be related to:
Functionality, related to the main function of the product
Technical quality, such as stability, durability, ease of maintenance
Additional services rendered during use and disposal
Aesthetics, such as appearance and design
Image (of the product or the producer)
Costs related to purchase, use and disposal
Specific environmental properties
Functionality, aesthetics, and image characterise the primary services provided to the user. Technical quality and
additional services ensure the primary services during the expected duration of these. Of the above-mentioned
properties, price is the only one that can be put into well-defined terms. Tech- nical quality and functionality can be
described a little less well defined, but still quantitatively. Other properties, such as aesthetics and image, cannot
be measured directly, but can only be described quali- tatively. Some of these properties can seem very irrational,
since they are not present in the product, but in the buyer’s perception of it. These properties can be greatly
influenced by commercial activities of the supplier. Differences in customer requirements may be based on differences in
the purchase sit- uation, the use situation, customer scale, age, sex, education, status, “culture”, attitudes etc.
To have a practical relevance, market segments must be of a size that can provide adequate revenue to support a separate
product line, and clearly distinct with a minimum of overlap, so that all products

targeted for a segment are considered substitutable by the customers of this segment, while there should be low
probability that a product targeted for another segment would be substitutable, imply- ing that product substitution
from segment to segment can be neglected.
As a default, if no information is available to justify a market boundary, it is assumed that no market boundary exists,
since this is the most general situation.

### 4.4.6 Market niches

Market segments may be further sub-divided into market niches. A market niche is a sub-category of a market segment,
where a part of the customers consider only niche products substitutable, although the majority of the customers allow
substitution between products from the niche and other products in the segment. Thus, the difference between a segment
and a niche is that between segments substitu- tion is negligible, while a large part of the customers in a segment will
allow substitution between niche products. Niche products are aimed at a smaller group of consumers within a segment,
for whom specific product properties are obligatory, while the same properties in the broader market segment are only
positioning product properties, i.e. properties that are considered nice to have by the customer and which may therefore
position the product more favourably with the customer, relative to other products with the same obligatory properties.
When market niches exist, the niche product has its own, separate name, indicating the additional ob- ligatory product
properties of the niche, e.g. “vegetable oil, sunflower” to separate this market niche from the general “vegetable oil”
. As only some of the niche product is consumed by niche consumers, the remaining amount is channelled into the general
market segment through separate re-labelling “niche product to generic market” transforming activities, e.g. “sunflower
oil to generic market for vegetable oil”, which have as its input the niche products and as output the products of the
general
market segment. Besides the change in name of the product, the “niche product to generic market” ac- tivities will also
include a change in the price of the products, see Chapter 5.6.5. If the properties of the niche product affect
downstream use or disposal activities differently from the other products in
the general market segment, these downstream differences must be added separately to the niche pro-
duction, as described in Chapter11.7.

## 4.5 Production and supply mixes

The database distinguishes between production, supply and consumption mixes.
A production mix represents the production-volume-weighted average of the suppliers of a specific product within a
specific geographical area. A supply mix is a production mix with the addition of the import of the specified product to
the specified geographical area. A consumption mix is the output of a market activity, as described in the previous
section. Consumption mixes represent production- volume-weighted averages of the suppliers to a specific market. Market
boundaries may or may not be congruent with the geographical areas for which production and supply mixes are provided.
Production mixes are automatically generated by the ecoinvent database service layer in the same way
as consumption mixes (as described in Chapter 4.3): The database automatically identifies the rele- vant transforming
activities based on the product name and the geographical location of the transform- ing activity, links the product
inputs of the production mix to each transforming activity by adding the corresponding ActivityLinkId (ecoSpold field
1520), calculating the amount of input from each trans- forming activity in proportion to its production volume, as
indicated in the ecoSpold field 1530 pro- ductionVolumeAmount of each transforming activity, and sums up the production
volumes, which then becomes the production volume of the production mix.
A supply mix is automatically generated by the ecoinvent database service layer by adding the import
(see Chapter11.5) for the geographical area as an input to the corresponding production mix.

Production and supply mixes are not systematically provided for all products and all geographical ar- eas. For
compatibility with the ecoinvent database version 2, production and supply mixes are provid- ed in most situations where
these were supplied in the ecoinvent database version 2. Production mixes may be provided in specific cases for
comparisons, or to represent the export from a geographical ar-
ea, but are not used in the further modelling of LCI results, except when required to reduce the matrix
size before calculation of accumulated systems results, see Chapter14.8.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: Datasets in version 3 are linked exclusively via well- defined and justified direct links or via market datasets providing consumption mixes. Since produc- tion and supply mixes can be generated for any geographical area, irrespective of the market bounda- ries, they are no longer applied in the further modelling.]

## 4.6 Transport

Freight transport occurs for most physical flows between activities in a product system. Transports are added as inputs
to the market activity datasets based as far as possible on data for the real market situ- ation. When specific data are
not available, default transport amounts are applied, relative to the ISIC class and kg wet mass of the product. The
default transport data are based on transport statistics, ac- cording to a methodology developed by Borken & Weidema (
2013), whereby the total amount of freight services provided by the road, rail, ship and air transport industries are
divided over the trans- ported products, based on the average transport distance and modal distribution. For products
that are known to be typically used at the production location, such as aluminium hydroxide, the transport dis- tances
have been set to zero.
Transports are assumed to be weight-limited when the packed product has a density above 250 kg/m3 and volume-limited
when the density is below 250 kg/m3 .
For intermediate inputs that are not provided via markets, i.e. where a using activity is directly linked to a supplying
activity, the transport is added directly as an input to the receiving activity. Additional
transport between markets (international transport) is added as an input to the import datasets (see
Chapter11.5) for the geographical area of each market.
If the transport distance and mode of an intermediate input to a specific activity is known to be differ- ent from the
market average, the intermediate input is modelled either as being supplied by a separate market with this specific
transport input, or using a direct link to the supplying activity, adding the specific transport as an input to the
receiving activity.
The transport datasets have names beginning with “transport, …” . The freight transport products de- scribe the
transport services in metric ton-kilometres with average load factors that include the aver- age share of empty return
trips.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: An algorithm has been implemented in the database ser- vice layer, adding
default transport inputs to the market datasets, replacing the former transport inputs to transforming activity
datasets. Non-default values from the version 2.2 datasets, as well as excep- tions to the default values are listed in
the Change report, Table
6.1. [At the time of the release of version 3.0: The datasets for waste building products (in version 2.2 named 'disposal, building,...'), and for wastewater, which is transported in sewers, have not been updated, but may be updated later by the ecoinvent editor for waste treatment.]

## 4.7 Trade margins and product taxes/subsidies

The wholesale and retail industries perform trade activities, which involve e.g. re-packaging, advertis- ing, use of
office machinery, warehousing, retail stores, with their use of electricity, heating and cool- ing. Also, some of the
transports of goods cannot be specified on products and are indirectly included

via the purchase of freight services by the wholesale and retail industries. Like other service indus- tries, trade
involves relatively large wage expenditures.
Altogether these activities result in a price difference also known as the trade margin, which together with the
transport costs makes up the difference between the producer’s prices and the purchaser’s prices reported in the market
activity datasets.
If product taxes less subsidies are subtracted from the producer’s prices, we arrive at the basic price reported in the
transforming activity datasets. We thus have:
basic prices + product taxes - product subsidies + trade margins + transport costs = purchaser’s prices
[Feature  considered  for  implementation  later:  The  trade  margins  may  be, in  parallel  to  the transport services, added as service inputs from the wholesale and retail industries to the market da- tasets. Product taxes less subsidies may be added as primary inputs (monetary elementary exchanges, see Chapter6.4) to the market activity datasets. Only packaging discarded before re-packaging is to be included as input to the wholesale or retail activity and thereby in the trade margin, while consumer
packaging should be reported as a separate input to the receiving activity where the packed product is used.]

## 4.8 Treatment activities

A treatment activity is a transforming activity with a reference product with a negative sign, which effectively means
that the activity is supplying the service of treating or disposing of the reference product.
Most treatment activities are waste treatment activities, including recycling activities. However, some by-products that
are normally not regarded as wastes may also need treatment before they can enter into a market where they can compete
with or substitute reference products from other activities. Such by-products and wastes are called materials for
treatment to distinguish them from those materials that can immediately – without further treatment – substitute a
reference product as an input to an ac- tivity. Note that it is not the economic value that determines whether a
material is a material for treatment, but exclusively its need for treatment.
Any transforming activity can be(come) a treatment activity, if one of its inputs is a material for treatment, but in
general, treatment activities are activities dedicated to treatment , i.e. having treat- ment as their original main
purpose.
Additional advice for data providers:
If no dedicated treatment activity exists in the database for a newly added material for treatment, this must be added
before upload of the activity supplying the material for treatment, or alternatively, at least one of the activi- ties
that currently use the material must be identified by the data provider as a treatment activity for this material,
implying that the original reference product of this activity is changed to be a by-product. To avoid loops or cas-
cades of by-products in the system models with partitioning, the latter may best be done by adding a constrained
market for the material for treatment, see Chapter11.4.
Treatment activities are modelled like any other technical service activities. Material characteristics like elemental
composition, heating value, combustibility, and degradation rates, are used to calculate material-specific outputs and
expenditures of treatment activities.
In general, the treatment activities are modelled so that each activity has one and only one material for treatment as
input. However, the same material for treatment can have different compositions (e.g. the fraction of paper in municipal
waste may differ, while the material may still be named municipal
waste) and properties (e.g. elemental composition, degradability, burnability) when supplied from dif- ferent
activities (see Chapter11.11for details on this modelling). If the treatment of two materials are co-dependent, i.e. if
the amount of a material that can be treated depends on the amount of another material for treatment, for example when
both a carbon- and nitrogen-rich waste is required for waste

fermentation, one of these materials is identified as the reference product, using the same procedure as for other
transforming activities (see Chapter 11.1), while the treatment of the other waste is identi- fied as a by-product.
An activity that has a material for treatment as an input, but which is not a treatment activity (i.e. it
has a positive reference product), is a speciality production. The modelling of speciality productions
is described in Chapter11.6.
The treatment technologies are as far as possible modelled with variables (see Chapter 5.7), so that e.g. the average
values for DeNOx-equipment in municipal waste incineration plants can be changed by the user according to the extent of
installation of this equipment in a particular situation.
Treatment services (the product outputs with negative signs) are inputs to treatment markets, i.e. the
market activities that in turn provide the treatment services to the activities that provide the materials
for treatment, see Chapter4.9.
In principle, it does not matter whether a waste supplying activity records its waste as a physical out- put or as a
negative physical input from a waste treatment service. In both situations, the database will calculate the waste as a
negative input and as a result the appropriate amount of waste treatment ser- vice is supplied to the waste supplying
activity. A positive output is the same as a negative input, so the mass balance for the waste supplying activity is
maintained.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The distinction between materials for treatment and other by-products is new. The definition of treatment activities is new.]

## 4.9 Treatment markets

Treatment markets are a specific kind of market activities (see Chapter 4.3), which operate on nega- tive reference
products, i.e. on the services of treating or disposing of the reference product. The ref- erence products of the
treatment activities and of the treatment markets are the materials for treatment arising as waste or by-product outputs
of other activities, identifiable as wastes or by-products that cannot immediately – without further treatment –
substitute a reference product as an input to an ac- tivity.
The treatment markets distribute the materials for treatment over the available treatment activities and speciality
productions, in the same way as a normal market activity distributes the demand over dif- ferent suppliers in proportion
to their production volume. Treatment markets therefore supply treat- ment mixes for specific materials for treatment.
The term treatment mix is not part of the name of the output, but is a consequence of the activity being a market
activity (as specified in the ecoSpold field 115 specialActivityType)  with a negative reference product. In graphical
presentations, the term (treatment mix) in brackets may be added after the name of the output.
As for normal market activities, the ecoinvent database automatically identifies the treatment activi- ties and
speciality productions that contribute to a specific treatment market, based on the name of the reference product (the
material for treatment) and the geographical location of the activities, links the negative inputs to the treatment
market from each treatment/speciality production activity by adding the corresponding ActivityLinkId (ecoSpold field
1520), calculates the amount of input from each
treatment activity or speciality production in proportion to the available production (treatment) vol- umes (based on
the data in the ecoSpold field 1530 productionVolumeAmount; see Chapter5.4) of each of these negative outputs of
material for treatment, and sums up these production volumes, which then becomes the production volume of the treatment
market. Note that the production (treat-
ment) volumes of the treatment markets do not necessarily match the generated amounts of material
for treatment, unless also accounting for the material arising from decommissioning of stocks, see
Chapter11.10.1.
As for normal market activities, treatment markets add average transport activities (incl. collection of the material
for treatment) and any activities related to the trade of the material for treatment. The

price of a material for treatment, i.e. the negative reference product, may be positive or negative: A positive price
for the material for treatment implies that the activity that supplies the material receives this price, while a
negative price implies that the activity that supplies the material pays this price for the
treatment. [Feature missing at the time of publication of ecoinvent v3.0: As for normal market activities, the output price of the treatment market is in purchaser’s prices, while the (negative) inputs of the material for treatment to the treatment market (and the outputs from the treatment activities) are in basic prices, see Chapter5.6.5. At the time of publication of ecoinvent v3.0, the price propagation described in Chapter 5.6.5 and thus the distinction between purchaser’s prices and basic prices, has
not yet been implemented.] Waste or treatment taxes are added to the treatment market, unless they are specific to
specific treatments.
Treatment markets reflect as far as possible the specific local situation of the treatment of specific ma- terials for
treatment. If information about the treatment of specific materials is not available, generic treatment activities are
applied, based on waste treatment statistics and similar generic data sources.

## 4.10 Recycling

All possible situations of recycling, including energy recovery, are exhaustively covered by the de-
scription of treatment activities in Chapter4.8:
Recycling activities, i.e. treatment activities that directly or indirectly supply outputs of by-products that can
substitute a reference product as an input to an activity, are modelled in exactly the same way as treatment activities
that do not provide such by-products.
Likewise, materials for recycling, i.e. materials for treatment that enable the treatment activities to
generate by-product outputs that can substitute a reference product as an input to an activity, are treat-
ed in exactly the same way as other materials for treatment, as described in Chapter4.8.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The ecoinvent database no longer operates with a priori cut-offs for recyclates. Thus, all outputs of wastes and by-products, for recycling or not, are treated in the same way and are linked to the relevant market activities. Because cut-offs were applied for ver- sion 2, some transforming datasets may be missing adequate outputs of minor by-products. When re- vising these  datasets, missing by-product  outputs  should be  added, together with their necessary treatment activities.]

## 4.11 Infrastructure / Capital goods

Infrastructure (also known as capital goods or investments) are products with a lifetime exceeding one year, and not
intended for consumption. Consumption here implies either final use by the receiving activity or incorporation into its
products. The lifetime is the period between the time of production and the time of initiating waste treatment of the
product.
The activity datasets for infrastructure production  (infrastructure datasets)  normally include the maintenance of the
infrastructure during its lifetime, its land occupation and land transformation, and its decommissioning for waste
treatment. Since the mass of the infrastructure products thus leaves the infrastructure dataset as wastes, the reference
products of these datasets do not have any mass, but must be regarded as services providing production capacity.
Therefore the reference product of the infrastructure production activities have the property “capacity” or “lifetime
capacity”, and the wastes of the infrastructure have the property “lifetime” exceeding one year (see also Chapter 4.21.1
on how by-products and wastes with a lifetime exceeding 1 year are identified as additions to stock).
As far as possible, infrastructure is provided in terms of lifetime capacity at full utilisation. For exam- ple:

    An activity “lignite power plant construction, 500 MW” has the reference product “lignite power

plant” expressed by the infrastructure lifetime (34 year or 300’000 hour) with the property “ca- pacity” of 500MW (or
139kWh/s), of which an activity “electricity production, lignite” with the reference product 1 kWh electricity and a
capacity utilisation of 0.68 will require 1kWh/(0.68*139kWh/s) = 0.01058 s (or 2.94E-6 hour). Alternatively, the
infrastructure product can be expressed in the dimensionless “1 unit” with the property “lifetime_capacity” 1.5E11 kWh (
corresponding to 300’000 hour * 500MW). The electricity production activity will require 1kWh/(0.68 * lifetime_capacity)
= 9.8E-12 unit of this input to produce 1 kWh electricity.
An activity “oil mill construction, 68.5 metric ton oil/day” has the reference product “oil mill” ex-
pressed by the infrastructure lifetime  (50 year or 1.58E9 s) with the property “capacity” of 0.79kg/s (or 68.5 metric
ton/day), of which an oil mill activity with the reference product 1 kg oil and a capacity utilisation of 0.9 will
require 1kg/(0.9*0.79kg/s) = 1.406 s (or 4.46E-8 year). Al- ternatively, the infrastructure product can be expressed in
the dimensionless “1 unit” with the property “lifetime_capacity” 1.25E9 kg (corresponding to 50 year * 68.5 metric
ton/day). The oil mill activity will require 1kg/(0.9 * lifetime_capacity) = 8.89E-10 unit of this input to produce 1 kg
oil.
An activity “milking parlour construction, 4 milking units” has the reference product “milking
parlour” expressed by the infrastructure lifetime 55’000 hours of milking with the property “ca- pacity” of 335
litre/hour, of which a milking activity with the reference product 1 litre and a ca- pacity utilisation of 0.4 will
require 1 litre/(0.4*335 litre/hour) = 0.0075 hour of milking parlour. Alternatively, the infrastructure product can be
expressed in the dimensionless “1 unit” with the property “lifetime_capacity” 1.84E7 litre (corresponding to 55000 hours

* 335 litre/hour). The milking activity will require 1 litre/(0.4 * lifetime_capacity) = 1.36 E-7 unit of this input to
  pro- vide milking service for 1 litre milk.
  In the above examples, lifetime is expressed in time units. In some cases, it may be relevant to express the lifetime
  in
  other terms, as in the following example, where the lifetime of a vehicle is expressed in kilometres:
  An activity “lorry production, 16 metric ton” has the reference product “lorry, 16 metric ton” ex-
  pressed by the infrastructure lifetime (540’000 km) with the property “capacity” of 9200 kg pay- load (16 metric ton
  minus 6800 kg net weight), of which a transport activity with the reference product 1 metric ton*km and a capacity
  utilisation of 0.1065 will require 1 metric ton*km/(0. 1065*9200 kg) = 1.0206 km. Alternatively, the infrastructure
  product can be expressed in the dimensionless “1 unit” with the property “lifetime_capacity” 4.97E6 metric ton*km (
  corre- sponding to 540’000 km * 9200 kg). The transport activity will require 1 metric ton*km/(0. 1065 *
  lifetime_capacity) = 1.89E-6 unit ofthis input to produce 1 metric ton*km.
  Additional advice for data providers:
  For new datasets, it is recommended to express the infrastructure products by the infrastructure lifetime at full
  capacity and provide the production capacity as a property, typically per time unit.
  [Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The definition and description of infrastructure is now more  precise. Infrastructure  activities  are  now  identified  by  the  property “capacity” or “life- time_capacity” . The recommendation to present the assumptions on lifetime, production capacity, and capacity utilisation more explicitly in the datasets, makes it easier to review these assumptions for consistency and to adjust them when better data are available. Datasets transferred from ecoinvent version 2 may not all be updated to the new description at the time of release of version 3. The as- sessment of infrastructures and capital equipments are still most often based on very rough estima- tions.]

## 4.12 Operation, use situations and household activities

Activity datasets with the term “operation” as part of their name signifies activities that use specific
infrastructures, e.g. “mine operation” as opposed to “mine construction” . Operation datasets therefore always have
inputs of infrastructure. Thus, “operation” is used as a synonym for “use” . The term is used both for industrial
activities and household activities.
Different products may be distinguished for the same use situation and modelled as separate trans- forming activities.
For example, the operation of desktop computers is modelled by separate activity datasets for the use situations “active
mode”, “standby/sleep mode” and “off mode” for different types of computers. The average use mix of these products may
then be represented by a market activity (consumption mix) for the generic computer in each use situation, e.g.
“operation, computer, desktop, active mode” . These average use situations may be further combined in transforming
activities for e.g. “operation, computer, desktop, office use”, which has a different combination of the use situations
than “operation, computer, desktop, home use”
. [At the time of the release of version 3.0: The mod- elling of electronic equipment in the current database is not exactly equal to what is described here with computers as an example]
.
In order not to introduce artificial differences between similar use situations, the ecoinvent database generally
classifies household activities together with the similar activities in industries, i.e. using the ISIC rev. 4
classification of activities. For example, home gardening of potatoes is classified under “Growing of vegetables and
melons, roots and tubers” (ISIC class 1.13), although in national statis- tics, this class will only contain
market-oriented activities.
When a distinction is required between the way the same product is used in large industries and in small businesses and
households, this is done by naming the activity “industrial …”, “home and small business …” or “private …”, and if
needed by introducing similar distinctions in the product of the activity. Furthermore, the tag (see Chapter 9.8)
“household activity” is added when it is necessary to distinguish household activities from commercial activities.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: In version 2, the modelling of datasets with the term “op- eration” as part of their names was sometimes in accordance with the above described, sometimes not. The following groups of datasets need to be reviewed, to ensure consistency with the above descrip- tion: Metal working, forestry, transport, road, rail and port operation and maintenance.]

## 4.13 Impact assessment data

### 4.13.1 Impact assessment datasets

Impact assessment datasets are available for various impact assessment methods, and their constituent impact categories.
[Feature not implemented at the time of the release of version 3.0, but considered for implemen- tation later: The ecoSpold 2 format for LCIA data is still in development by a committee, and is planned for implementation for a later ecoinvent version. Until then, the old impact assessment data from ecoinvent version 2 will be applied. The new format will distinguish between impact assessment method datasets containing a grouping of impact categories, and documentation for this grouping, and impact category datasets containing impact pathway characterisation and/or weighting factors that describes the relative contribution to an impact category from one or more environmental exchanges or intermediate impact assessment results.]
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The separate datasets for impact assessment methods and categories allows a more flexible combination and sharing of impact categories across methods.]

### 4.13.2 Impact assessment results

When the impact assessment data are combined with the amounts of exchanges from a specific activi- ty or accumulated
system dataset (see Chapter4.15), the result is a list of impacts for that activity or product system.
Impact assessment results (LCIA results) can be viewed for any accumulated system dataset for which environmental
exchanges are available, including the allocated activity datasets of system models with
partitioning. [Feature considered for implementation later: Impact assessment results (LCIA results) can be viewed for single activities as well.]

### 4.14 Interlinked datasets

In the preceding sub-Chapters (4. 1 -4.12), the activity datasets have mainly been described as stand- alone datasets,
each representing a specific human activity as it can be observed “in real life” . No spe- cific model has been
described to explain how these stand-alone datasets can be combined into con- tiguous, isolated product systems (life
cycles). Since practically all human activities influence and link to each other, isolated product systems do not exist
“in real life” . They are artificial thought con- structs that isolate some human activities from the rest, and define
these as a product system, related to one specific product.
It is the purpose of system models to provide rules for linking the activity datasets into contiguous product systems,
each one isolated from all other product systems.
In the stand-alone description of an activity, which can be validated against its real life counterpart, the system
model (ecoSpold field 3005 systemModelName) is undefined. These activity datasets will typically have more than one
product output and cannot be immediately linked, unless all intermediate inputs are already specified with a supplying
activity (ecoSpold field 1520 ActivityLinkId). When the activity is to be linked into a product system, a choice of a
system model therefore has to be made, which provides the information on how to generate single-product datasets from
multi-product da- tasets and which supplying activities to link to each specific intermediate input.
Two classes of system models can be distinguished: System models with substitution (system expan- sion) and system
models with partitioning (allocation). Within each of these two classes, several in- stances can be defined. The
ecoinvent database supports currently two system models with substitu- tion:
Substitution, consequential, long-term (short name: ‘Consequential’)
Substitution, constrained by-products (short name:  ‘Substitution, ILCD A’) [not available at the
time of publication of v3.0]
and four system models with partitioning:
Allocation, ecoinvent default (short name: ‘Allocation, default’)
Allocation by revenue (short name: ‘Allocation, revenue’) [not available in v3.0]       Allocation by dry mass (short
name: ‘Allocation, dry mass’) [not available in v3.0]
Allocation by carbon (short name: ‘Allocation, carbon’) [not available in v3.0]
These system models, and the rationales behind them, are explained in more detail in Chapter14. For each system model, a
set of linking and/or allocation rules is applied, described in Chapter14, that al- lows the database service layer to
add the missing direct links to each input of each activity, and to generate single-product datasets from multi-product
datasets.
Additional advice for data providers:
The resulting database-generated dataset implementations, each with the name of their system model in the field
systemModelName, are not intended for further editing by the data provider. If, upon inspection of a database-

generated interlinked dataset, an error or unintended link or allocation is discovered, the corresponding correc- tion
must be made in the underlying dataset with system model undefined.

## 4.15 Accumulated system datasets

An accumulated system dataset shows the aggregated environmental exchanges (LCI results) and im- pacts (LCIA results) of
the product system related to one specific product from one specific activity. This implies that accumulated datasets
are calculated for each product output of each activity dataset in the database (for system models with substitution,
only for reference products). The calculation of
accumulated system datasets is performed by the database service layer according to the algorithms
described in Chapter14.8.
The product systems include all upstream activity datasets, as linked by the intermediate exchanges, and therefore do
not themselves have any intermediate exchanges, only environmental exchanges (LCI results) and accumulated impact
assessment results (LCIA results).
