5 Level of detail

5.1 Unit process data level
As far as possible, the database contains data on a unit process level that are neither vertically nor hor- izontally
aggregated (aggregating two or several subsequent activities in a supply chain, and aggregat- ing two or several
different activities delivering the same intermediate outputs, respectively)2 .
In general, inputs and outputs of several distinct unit processes are aggregated only if a) individual da- ta are not
available, or b) individual data are confidential.
However, we seek to avoid the separate reporting of unit processes when this does not add any useful information in an
LCA context. This is the case when one unit processes always supplies all of its products directly to another specific
unit process at the same location, so that the product of the first unit process never appears as a marketable product,
and cannot be supplied by an external supplier. In
such cases, the use of parameterisation is preferred to further subdivision of unit processes, see Chap-
ter5.7.
The necessary degree of detail in unit process descriptions as well as in naming of products depends on whether
meaningful markets are identified for the different reference products. The lowest level of market segmentation is the
market niche (see Chapter 4.4.6) and the obligatory product properties in this niche defines how detailed the reference
product needs to be described to distinguish it from other products in other niches or market segments. For example, the
product name "argon, crude, liquid" includes the necessary specification to distinguish it from the purified “argon,
liquid", while the term “liquid” is only relevant if argon is also marketed in other forms. If products on the same
market dif- fer in terms of non-obligatory properties, these differences are not reported in the name, but may be
reported as product properties (see Chapter 5.5). Obviously, the necessary level of unit process de-
scription follows from this, since it is the unit processes that provide the reference products and each unit process
typically only provides one reference product.
When data for different exchanges are representing incongruent system boundaries, e.g. when VOC emissions are measured
for unit process A separately and for unit processes B+C together, while en- ergy use is measured for unit process A+B
together and for unit process C separately, a separate de- scription for each unit process can only be obtained by
partitioning the data, separating from the orig- inal measurements that part of the energy and emissions that belong to
unit process B . In this situa- tion, the uncertainty in the partitioning must be held up against the need for separate
data for each unit process, as opposed to provide only one dataset for A+B+C together (Weidema et al. 2003).
It should be noted that when individual data for an activity are available at different levels of detail (e.g. data on
energy use may be available at production line detail, VOC emissions only available at plant level, while other
emissions are only available at industry level), reporting at the highest level of detail (i.e. production line detail)
implies an assumption that the data with a low degree of detail (data at industry level) are representative for the more
specific situation, i.e. that the population is homoge- neous. However, given the available data, this assumption
appears to provide the best possible esti- mate.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The desired level of detail is now described more precise- ly, seeking to avoid unnecessary sub-division of activities]

2 Outlook: The intention is to replace old aggregated datasets by unit process data.

5.2 Confidential datasets
An activity dataset that includes confidential information may be kept inaccessible as a unit process dataset while
still being included in calculations of accumulated systems datasets. This is achieved by setting the ecoSpold field
accessRestrictedTo to an option different from the default “Public” or “Li- censees” . Access may be further protected
by passwords and encryption, but these forms of protection are not part of the ecoSpold format as such.
Confidential datasets are subject to the same data quality guidelines as any other ecoinvent dataset, but the review
procedure will be performed under the direct management of the ecoinvent database administrator that signs and/or
manages the necessary confidentiality agreements, also in case of re- delegation of the review to independent reviewers.
This option is only applicable when there are less than three producers of a product, or for branded and single
enterprise datasets, see Chapter 11.3, when an individual enterprise wishes to present its activity not as a unit
process, but as an accumulated dataset only. When at least three independent da- ta providers have provided confidential
datasets for the same type of product, the ecoinvent Centre may include the supplied data in an averaged dataset for the
generic product.

5.3 Sub-dividing activities with combined production
Multi-product activities are ubiquitous in LCA product systems. The ecoinvent database accommo- dates unallocated
multi-product activity datasets as well as their derived single-product datasets.
A distinction is made between combined and joint production. In combined production the output volumes of the (combined)
products can be independently varied, while in joint production the rela- tive output volume of the (joint) products is
fixed. For joint production, the single-product datasets
are automatically calculated by the database service layer according to the procedures described in
Chapter14.4.
In many production activities where one raw material is used to produce several outputs, the produc- tion parameters can
be adjusted to give different relative yields of the products, but only within cer- tain limits. For example, in oil
refining, the output of pitch (synonyms: bitumen; asphalt) varies be- tween 7% and 79% depending on the origin of the
raw oil. Thus, for each individual raw oil type, the output of pitch is not variable, but for refineries as a whole,
pitch can be regarded as a variable output as long as the demand as a whole does not fall below 7% of the total demand
for the refinery prod-
ucts. In general, the ecoinvent database does not support modelling of large changes (see Chapter
14.6.2), and the datasets therefore reflect only operation within the current limits.
Some activities may appear as allowing individual variation in output, but when subjected to a closer analysis it is
only possible to keep the output of the other products constant by adjusting sub- processes not involved in the original
production. Thus, what appears at the superficial level to be a
case of individually variable products may in fact be a joint production requiring use of the proce-
dures described in Chapter14.4. For example, if an oil refinery is regarded as a black box, the outputs of different
fuels, olefins and other refinery fractions may be individually varied, so that practically any desired relation between
the outputs can be obtained. The only fixed fractions are refinery gas and pitch. However, when having access to data
for the individual processes within the refinery, it be- comes clear that this flexibility in outputs is achieved by
allowing simultaneous changes in a large number of individual processes and alternative production routes, for which the
choice depends on the price relations, constraints on raw material availability, and the demand for the different
products.
When the output volumes can be independently varied, all exchanges can be related to the combined
products by a mathematical relation (see Chapter5.7). For example, factors for sub-dividing oil refin- eries have been
determined on the basis of detailed mass and energy flows of the individual sub- processes, such as atmospheric
distillation, etc. The products can often be expressed in terms of the physical parameter that is limiting the combined
production activity, e.g. weight or volume for a com-

bined transport of different products with different densities, where the amount of products that can be transported is
either weight or volume limited.
When each of two or more intermediate outputs of an activity dataset is referenced to by a mathemati- cal relation from
at least one exchange, and each of the other exchanges is related to at least one ref- erence product, the mathematical
relations are then used to sub-divide the multi-product activity (manually or by the database service layer, see Chapter
14.1, linking rule no. 4) into an equivalent
number of separate datasets, each with one of these intermediate outputs as its reference product. The other exchanges
of the sub-divided datasets are determined by the mathematical relations provided in the original dataset, so that each
sub-divided dataset describes only the part of the multi-product activ- ity that changes with a change in output of that
specific product. Thus, the modelling of combined production involves only the internal working of the multi-product
activity and is modelled in the same way for system models with substitution and system models with partitioning. No
allocation is required beyond what is implied by the mathematical relations.
Only positive additive elements (summands) of the mathematical relations are used. This implies that if one of the
combined products involves a reduction in an input, the reduction is modelled as a posi- tive output, and reductions in
outputs are modelled as positive inputs. For example, an input of an in- ert waste to a combined waste combustion
activity will reduce the potential heat output of the com- bustion activity. Instead of subtracting the heat requirement
related to the inert waste reference prod- uct from the energy output, it is added as an input of heat. The heat output
will thereby represent the gross heat output, while the heat output minus the heat input will represent the net heat
production.
Datasets with combined products may be sub-divided manually by the data provider, in which case the original
multi-product dataset is not available in the ecoinvent database. If the dataset is supplied as a multi-output dataset (
recommended) with all other exchanges expressed as mathematical func- tions of the amount of the combined products, the
multi-product dataset will be available as such. The
sub-division is then performed by the database service layer, and the sub-divided datasets are only available in the
database-generated interlinked datasets (see Chapter14). When the subdivision is per- formed by the database service
layer, the subdivided datasets have the same activity ID as the original dataset, which implies that the product name is
required to distinguish the datasets from each other.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: In version 2, some datasets with combined production (ethanolamine production, gravel and sand quarry operation, petroleum refinery operation, hydro- formylation of butane and propylene, benzene chlorination, sheep production) were not sub-divided, but allocated. These multi-product activities are now instead sub-divided.]

5.4 Production volumes
All transforming datasets include data on the production volume of the production facility, or from statistical sources
on supply when the dataset represents several facilities. When statistical sources on supply are not available, the
production volumes may be indirectly estimated from the demand.
Data is always annual production volumes relating to the time period and geographical area of the da- taset and the unit
of the product. This implies that
When calculating total production volumes, e.g. for market datasets, the data can be utilised un-
modified even when the time period of the dataset is different from a full year.
When more than one activity produces the same product within the same market area, the produc-
tion volume of each activity reflects that activity alone, i.e. the production volumes are additive.
Production volumes of market datasets are automatically calculated by the database service layer and are available in
the interlinked market datasets of the system models with partitioning. If provided in the datasets with system model
undefined, production volumes for market activities are provided only as text in the comment field.

Production volumes of treatment activities include treatment of wastes from previous years and will therefore not (
necessarily) equal the total amount of waste generated in the time period of the treat- ment datasets. In parallel,
production volumes of average operation/use datasets reflect the use of the current “fleet” of equipment, which may not
be identical to the equipment currently produced. For an LCI of a specific type of equipment, the corresponding specific
operation/use dataset should therefore be applied.
[At the time of the release of version 3.0: For some datasets converted from the ecoinvent version 2.2, the real production volumes have not yet been added and a dummy value (typically “1” or “4”) have been used instead and documented in the comment field for the production volume. However, for all important products with more than one producing dataset, the production volume data have been added and reviewed, meaning that the production volume amounts are not affecting the results.]

5.5 Technology level of activities
The technology level of each transforming activity is classified in one of these five classes:
“New” for a technology assumed to be on some aspects technically superior to modern technology, but not yet the most
commonly installed when investment is based on purely economic considerations.
“Modern” for a technology currently used when installing new capacity, when investment is based on
purely economic considerations (most competitive technology).
“Current” for a technology in between modern and old.
“Old” for a technology that is currently taken out of use, when decommissioning is based on purely
economic considerations (least competitive technology).
“Outdated” for a technology no longer in use.

Market activities, production/supply mixes, import/export activities and correction datasets do not have a technology
level.
It should be noted that the terms used do not necessarily reflect the age of the technologies. A modern technology can
be a century old, as long as it is still the most competitive technology, and an old technology can be relatively young,
if it is one that has quickly become superseded by other more competitive ones.
The technology level relates to the year for which the dataset is valid, as given under temporal validi- ty; see Chapter
4.2.2. In a time series, the same technology can move between different technology levels over time. For forecasted
datasets, the technology level can also depend on the macro-economic
scenario. The same technology can also be given different technology levels in different geographical locations, even in
the same year.
The technology level is of particular importance in system models that take into account technology constraints, where
the setting of the technology level determines whether an activity is included as an unconstrained supplier to the
markets, depending on the specific rules for the particular system model (see Chapter14.3). For example, in the system
model “Substitution, consequential, long-term”, an ac- tivity is identified as unconstrained if its technology level is
“Modern” for increasing, stable, or slow-
ly decreasing market volumes of its reference product, while for rapidly decreasing market volumes, the activity is
identified as unconstrained if its technology level is “Old” . The other technology levels may come into play if the
database does not contain any datasets with the required technologies.
Since a modern technology may be a technology not yet in operation, its current production volume may be zero. However,
in order for this technology to be included in the consumption mix of the sys- tem models with linking to unconstrained
suppliers, it must be given a small production volume, e.g.

comparable to a pilot plant or less, small enough not to influence the current average production vol- ume used in other
system models.
The distinction between technology levels is based on an economic rationale since capacity adjust- ments typically are
decided on the basis of long-term competitiveness as determined by the expected production costs per unit over
long-term. With respect to geographical location, it is assumed that competitiveness is determined by the cost structure
of the most important production factor (labour costs for labour intensive products, else energy and raw material costs)
. When comparing labour costs, local differences in productivity and labour skills are taken into account. If producers
are dis- tinguished by their cost structure and location, the most competitive supplier for a specific localised demand
can be assessed by adding the specific transport costs.
Additional advice for data providers:
Unless manually changed by the data provider, the technology level is by default set to “current.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The classification according to technology level is new. By default all datasets in the ecoinvent version 2 are set to “current” . A list of datasets for which the technology level has been manually adjusted to something different from “current” is available in the change report (Moreno Ruiz et al. 2013).]
Outlook: For electricity markets, most of the electricity generation activites supplying the markets are currently
specified as “modern”, with technology- and geography-specific exceptions, which are ex- plained on the ecoinvent
Editor's pages. A more sophisticated and detailed modelling of the marginal supply to each national electricity market
is considered for coming database versions.

5.6 Properties of exchanges

5.6.1 Mass and elemental composition
All exchanges are provided with data on wet mass, dry mass, and water mass, given per unit of the exchange, and water
and carbon content per dry mass, the latter subdivided in fossil and non-fossil carbon. The content of other elements
may be provided in addition. If the product output is specified in terms of elemental composition, these elements are
also specified in the inputs that provide these elements.
For substances other than water, dry mass is not the same as ash content, but is calculated as the wet mass minus the
water mass, and thus includes chemically bound H and O. Inputs or outputs of water may therefore, somewhat
counter-intuitively, have a dry mass, when the water is incorporated into or released from chemical reactions involving
chemically bound H and O.
Elemental composition is always given per dry mass. This implies that if the elemental composition is required per
amount of an exchange, e.g. for use as an allocation property, the elemental composition shall be multiplied by the dry
mass, before multiplying with the amount of the exchange.
Additional advice for data providers:
Data providers to the ecoinvent database are not required to supply data on mass and elemental composition. If data on
wet mass, dry mass, water mass, water and carbon content per dry mass is missing for a newly supplied exchange, values
will be added to the master file by the responsible editor.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: Wet mass, dry mass, water mass, and water and carbon content (the latter divided in fossil and non-fossil) now provided for all relevant exchanges.]

5.6.2 Fossil and non-fossil carbon
A distinction is made between fossil and non-fossil sources of CO2, CO and CH4 . The sources of fos- sil carbon are the
resource inputs of fossil fuels, peat, and mineral carbonates.
The resource consumption of “Carbon dioxide, in air” is calculated from the carbon in harvested plants and wild animals
and increases in carbon stored in soils and plants . The latter is recorded as an output of “Carbon dioxide, to soil or
biomass stock” . “Carbon dioxide, in air” is the only source of non-fossil carbon, which is mainly captured through the
biological photosynthesis.
Reductions in the carbon stored in soils and the release of carbon from the burning of biomass resi- dues in connection
to land transformation, e.g. the clear-cutting of primary forests, are recorded in the elementary exchange (resource)
“Carbon, organic, in soil or biomass stock” . All of this input is in- cluded in the corresponding emissions of Carbon
dioxide, Carbon monoxide, and Methane, all with the addition “ …, from soil or biomass stock”, and therefore does not
contribute to any carbon content of any intermediate exchanges.
The properties carbon_content_nonfossil and carbon_content_fossil are used by the database service
layer to calculate the properties carbon_content and carbon_allocation for use in the carbon allocated
implementation of the ecoinvent database, see Chapter14.7.3.
[Changes  relative to  ecoinvent version 2:  The  exchanges “Carbon, organic, in  soil or biomass stock” and “Carbon dioxide, from soil or biomass stock” replaces the exchanges “Carbon, in organic matter, in soil” and “Carbon dioxide, land transformation” used in version 2. All datasets with these exchanges have been revisited to ensure that carbon balances are correct.]

5.6.3 Energy content
Energy content is not a required property of exchanges in the ecoinvent database.
If reported, the property “energy content” is accounted for in gross heating value (gross calorific val- ue, higher
heating value, upper heating value) in energy units per unit of the exchange.
Heat and electricity are measured directly in energy units.
Due to the significant energy losses or costs in transporting steam or hot air, the necessary heat is al- ways produced
in close geographical proximity to the activity requiring heating or cooling energy, of- ten in an in-house boiler or
purchased from a local heat producer. Thus, for site-specific datasets, the fuel type, boiler efficiency and operational
emissions will typically be known and can be modelled specifically.
For the more generic datasets in ecoinvent, covering several – possibly unspecified – locations, typi- cally only the
amount of heat or the amount of fuel required will be available, sometimes with a speci- fication on fuel type. For
these situations, the generic heat inputs are used. When specific data are un- available, a distribution with 1/3 of the
heat input from natural gas and 2/3 from other fuel sources is applied.
The gross calorific value is the amount of heat generated by a given substance when it is completely oxidised. Calorific
values are measured experimentally with a bomb calorimeter and can be calculated as the difference between the standard
enthalpy of formation (also known as the standard heat of for- mation ΔHfO or ΔfHO ; the change of enthalpy that
accompanies the formation of 1 mole of the sub- stance in its standard state from its constituent elements in their most
stable form at 1 bar of pressure and 298.15 K or 25 degrees Celsius) of the oxidation products and the substance before
oxidation. The gross calorific value includes the heat of condensation of water in the oxidation products. In con-
trast, the net  (or lower)  calorific value assumes that the enthalpy of vaporization of water (40.65 kJ/mol) is not
recovered. It is useful in comparing fuels where condensation of the oxidation products is impractical, or heat at low
temperatures cannot be put to use.

When specific data are unavailable, the gross calorific values in Table 5.1 are applied. The Table also gives densities
for some common fuels for conversion from MJ to kg and back.
Data on standard enthalpy of formation are generally obtained from the thermochemistry data in the NIST Chemistry
WebBook  <http://webbook.nist.gov /chemistry/>. All elements in their standard states (e.g. oxygen gas) have a standard
enthalpy of formation of zero, as there is no change involved in their formation.

Table 5.1. Default values for gross and net calorific values and density of some common fuels.

	gross calorific value

MJ/kg net calorific value
MJ/kg Density

kg/l
agricultural biogas 23.7 21.4 0.00113
crude oil 45.8 43.2 0.86
Diesel 45.4 42.8 0.84
gasoline 45.1 42.5 0.75
hard coal 30.4 28.9
hard coal, briquette 32.4 31.4
hard coal, coke 28.9 28.6
heavy fuel oil 43.7 41.2 1.0
kerosene 45.6 43.0 0.795
light fuel oil 45.2 42.6 0.86
lignite, briquette 20.9 19.5
lignite, hard 17.8 16.8
lignite, soft 9.5 8.4
methanol 22.7 20.0 0.792
Naphtha 47.7 45.0 0.75
natural gas 1)  50.4 (40.3)  45.4 (36.3)  0.0008
petroleum coke 36.1 35.0 1.1 (0.650 to 1.3)

1) values in brackets: MJ/m3

[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The use of energy efficiencies for renewable energy in- puts and the inclusion of waste heat have been discontinued. Boiler datasets such as "light fuel oil, burned in industrial furnace 1MW, non-modulating" are revised to have instead heat as an output, i.e. integrating with datasets such as “heat, light fuel oil, at industrial furnace 1MW", specifying the input of fuel in both MJ and other relevant physical units as product properties of the output. The conver- sion and re-linking of the datasets, including revising the datasets that demanded inputs such as "light fuel oil, burned in industrial furnace 1MW, non-modulating" have been done as a database-wide au- tomatic routine.]

5.6.4 Density
Activity datasets for solid wood and semi-finished wood products are modelled per m3 . Bulk wood products such as wood
chips are modelled per kg dry mass. The density and the heating value of wood strongly depend on the moisture content.
The water content on a dry mass basis (referred to as the u- value in ecoinvent version 1&2) is given as a property
rather than being included in the names of the activities and/or products. Some default values used for density of wood
products are provided in Ta- ble 5.2.

Table 5.2 Default values for density of wood product

Wood type (water content on dry mass basis) 1)  density
kg/l
Construction wood Softwood, round wood 2) wet (70%)  0.765
Softwood, industrial wood 3) wet (140%)  1.080
Softwood air dried (20%)  0.540
Softwood kiln dried (10%)  0.715
Hardwood, round wood wet (70%)  1.105
Hardwood, industrial wood wet (80%)  1.170
Hardwood air dried (20%)  0.780
Hardwood kiln dried (10%)  0.715
Energy wood logs, softwood, 1 year dried (30%)  0.585
logs, softwood, 2 years dried (20%)  0.540
logs, softwood, in the forest (140%)  1.080
logs, hardwood, 1 year dried (30%)  0.845
logs, hardwood, 2 years dried (20%)  0.780
logs, hardwood, in the forest (80%)  1.170
) Moisture given in weight-% related to the dry mass of wood.
) round wood = entire trunk before cutting
) industrial wood = smaller pieces, branches

[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: Bulk wood products, such as wood chips, are now mod- elled per kg dry mass, instead of per m3, which avoids the distinction between solid and bulk volume.]

5.6.5 Price of products and wastes
The property “price” is usually obtained from statistical sources and reported for the outputs of mar- ket activity
datasets as the purchaser’s price in currency units per unit of the
exchange. [At the time of publication of ecoinvent v3.0: Thoroughly reviewed prices have not been added to all intermedi- ate exchanges.]
[Feature missing at the time of publication of ecoinvent v3.0: As part of the linking of the datasets by the database service layer, see Chapter14, these price properties are transferred to the correspond- ing inputs to the transforming activity datasets. The price property for the inputs of the same product to the market activities is reported as the basic price (i.e. without product taxes), calculated from the purchaser’s price of the output according to this formula:
purchaser’s price - trade margins - transport costs - product taxes + product subsidies = basic price
Product taxes less subsidies are added as primary inputs (monetary elementary exchanges, see Chap- ters6.4) to the market activity datasets, while the trade margins and transport costs are determined by the prices of the intermediate inputs to the market activities from the wholesale, retail and transport industries.
When the datasets are linked by the database service layer (see Chapter 14), the basic prices calculat- ed above are transferred to the corresponding outputs of transforming activities, and finally the price property of any directly linked intermediate inputs (see Chapter4.4.1) are transferred from the corre- sponding supplying activity. This allows the calculation of monetary balances for the transforming ac- tivity datasets.]
For exported products, the purchaser’s price of the exporting area is also known as FOB (Free On Board). International
transports costs (CIF = Cost Insurance and Freight) are then added as inputs to the import activity in the importing
country, resulting in a “CIF” price at the border of the importing

area corresponding to the basic price of that area. The imported product then contributes to the local market (
consumption mix) and there will have the same purchaser’s price as the products produced domestically in the importing
area.
The above price relationships are also applicable to treatment markets, i.e. the output price of a treat- ment market is
in purchaser’s prices (a negative price of the negative reference product implies a cost of treatment, while a positive
price implies a payment from the treatment activity to the supplier of the material for treatment), while the outputs
from the treatment activities are in basic prices.
When niche markets exist, see Chapter4.4.6, these will typically support higher prices than the corre- sponding general
market segments. When part of a niche product is sold on the general market seg- ment, this therefore involves a price
reduction. Furthermore, the “mixing of niche product” activities, which transform the niche products to be inputs to the
general market segments, receive the niche products in purchaser’s prices of the niche markets and supply them in basic
prices of the general market segments. Thus, the “mixing of niche product” activities will, besides changing the name of
their products, imply a price reduction of the products, both because the general market segments do not support the
higher price of the niche products, and because the activities transform the prices from
purchaser’s prices back to basic prices. This price reduction implies that a “mixing of niche product”
activity has a corresponding negative net operating surplus (see Chapter6.4).
Additional advice for data providers:
Data providers to the ecoinvent database are not required to supply price data. If data on price is missing in a
supplied market dataset, values will be suggested by the responsible editor, and can then be entered by the data
provider when the dataset is returned from the editor.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The consistent inclusion of price information is new.]

5.6.6 Allocation properties
An allocation property is a property used for calculating allocation factors, either for a transforming activity
dataset (master allocation property) or for a single exchange (specific allocation property) .
The property “true value relation” is a property specifically added for allocation purposes. The “true value relation”
property is set by the database service layer as identical to the price, unless the proper- ty “true value relation” is
specifically provided in the original, manually edited dataset (the dataset with system model undefined). Thus,
allocation by true value is a variant of the allocation using “price” as allocation property, introduced to correct for
some problems identified in the latter ap- proach in two specific situations:
When there is a very high annual variation in the relative average prices of the joint products, the
“true value relation” property may be set to the same ratio as the ratio of the average prices for a longer time period.
When the joint products have a shared functional property that should determine their relative
value if not affected by market imperfections or perverse regulation, the “true value relation” property may be set to
the same ratio as the amounts of this property. An example of this is the price of heat as a joint product from
electricity production. Here, it is possible to argue that exer- gy, i.e. the ability of the products to perform work,
is a shared property of the two products that reflects the true, functional value of the products, and that in a perfect
market this would be re- flected in the relative prices of the products. Thus, when both electricity and useful heat are
prod- ucts of the same activity, the “true value relation” results in the same allocation factors for the two products
as if the property “exergy” had been used, while the sum of the “true value” of the two products equal the sum of the
revenue from these two products, so that allocation based on the price can still be made for any other joint product.
For simple identification of activities for which “true value relation” properties are provided in the original dataset,
the ecoinvent database automatically adds a tag “with true value” to such activities.

[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: While maintaining the same options as in the ecoinvent database version 2, the ecoSpold 2 format provides a simplified option to use properties for alloca- tion.]

5.6.7 The designation “Defining value”
In the master file in which an exchange is defined, a property of the exchange can be designated as a “defining value” .
This implies that its value is a part of the definition of the exchange and therefore has a fixed relation to the amount
of the exchange that cannot be changed for individual instances of the exchange in different datasets, for example, the
sulfur content of the elementary exchange Sulfur dioxide.

5.7 Use of variables within datasets
Values for exchange amounts and properties can be expressed as mathematical relations, using an ecoinvent-adapted
version of the Open Document Formula Language3 . For each field, where a math- ematical relation is used, there is also
a comment field, in which the mathematical relation is docu- mented.
Variables for use in mathematical relations can be defined as specific parameters, valid within the in- dividual dataset
only. In addition, any exchange amount and property within a dataset can be used as a variable in mathematical relations
of the same dataset. Exchange amounts and properties can be given a specific variable name, but also the unique
identifiers (UUID’s) of each exchange amount and prop- erty can be used as a variable directly, using the REF function,
i.e. REF('UUID').
Parameters and other variables can themselves be defined via mathematical relations including varia- bles, i.e., nested
variables are allowed, to the extent that circular references are not created.
Variables are unique to each dataset, i.e. it is not possible to define global variables valid for more than one
dataset, except when a property of an exchange is designated as a “defining value”, see Chapter5.6.7. However, in
combination with the option of parent/child datasets (see Chapter4.2), al- so variables are inherited, which implies
that relations between exchanges and/or properties are pre-
served from parent dataset to child dataset. Each variable in each child dataset can of course have a different value
from the variable value in the parent dataset.
The use of mathematical relations allows entry of data directly copied from original data sources, in their original
units, and therefore contributes to reduce data conversion as a source of error and pro- vides a more transparent
documentation of the calculations that have been performed upon the prima- ry data.
Additional advice for data providers:
It is recommended to define variables in parent (reference) datasets first, before creating delta/child datasets.
Variables can be applied to reduce the effort when creating and maintaining datasets for very similar activities, e.g.
extrusion of different metals: Although separate datasets are still needed for extrusion of steel and extrusion of
aluminium, the same generic dataset can be applied as a starting point, expressing the specific differences in exchanges
as conditional upon the Boolean parameters “steel” and/or “aluminium”, e.g., the electricity use per deformation stroke
can be expressed as “Alu*0. 115 + Steel*0.527” kWh, where the value will be 0.115 if Alu is true and Steel is false, and
0.527 in the opposite situation. All the exchanges that are identical to the two forms of extrusion then do not have to
be entered twice.

3 Described in the documentation to the ecoSpold format: Schemas/AdditionalDocumentation in
the zip-file for the ecoSpold format version 2 available at http://www.spold.org/ecospold-v2/

ecoinvent-report No. 1 39

[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The option to use variables is new.]

5.8 Text variables
Some ecoSpold fields of the type TTextAndImage (the fields general comment, allocation comment, geography comment,
technology comment, and time period comment) allow the use of text variables.
Text variables are used to include, exclude or edit specific text strings within an inherited text field. This allows
easy changes of parts of texts for the child activity datasets. See also Chapter4.2for more details on inheritance.
A text variable is defined in a parent dataset and included in a text string by placing the variable name in {{curly
brackets}} For example, in the text string: “This dataset is includes the {{metal}} extru- sion”, the variable ‘metal’
may be given the value ‘metal’ in the parent dataset, but other appropriate values such as ‘steel’ and ‘aluminium’ in
different child datasets. Thereby, only the difference be- tween parent and child text has to be edited, while keeping
the rest of the parent text intact.

5.9 No double-counting

5.9.1 Activity datasets
The ecoSpold field includedActivitiesStart describes the starting point of the activity. For unit pro- cesses, the
starting point may be described in terms of the nature of the inputs and the point of recep- tion, e.g. "From reception
of raw materials [possibly further specified] at the factory gate [possibly further specified]" or "Service starting
with the input of [e.g. labour and energy]” . For aggregated sys- tem datasets, the starting point is always "From
cradle, i.e. including all upstream activities".
The ecoSpold field includedActivitiesEnd describes the included activities to the extent that this is not
self-explanatory from the activity name, as well as activities or inputs that are intentionally excluded, e.g. if the
activity “application of pesticides” as a service excludes the pesticide, in order to be appli- cable for many different
active ingredients, or if the quality of the available data for the inputs is inad- equate; see Chapter 13. The
description ends by mentioning the last activity and/or point of delivery, e.g. “until and including loading of the
product on lorries” .
Additional advice for data providers:
In the text in the includedActivities fields, especially if raw materials inputs are specified, ensure that inputs are
not described in such a way that it can be misunderstood whether the production and supply of these inputs are part of
the activity described. For example “Machine infrastructure is included” or “Inputs of are XX are consid- ered” can be
misunderstood to mean that the production of the machine infrastructure and/or the input XX is part of the described
activity, when they are in fact simply inputs to the activity, and recorded as such under exchang- es. See the wording
suggested above for good practice.
The clear description of the start and end of each activity reduces the risk of overlapping datasets or gaps between
datasets. If temporal markets are defined (see Chapter 4.4.4), the sum of all temporal markets should equal the average
market. For geographically distinct datasets for the same activity, the database validation procedures ensure that the
sum of the production volume of all datasets for the
same activity equals the global production volume. Double-counting is also generally avoided by the
completeness of the database, which implies that any new activity dataset added to the database is ef-
fectively a disaggregation of an existing activity dataset, see Chapter13.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: In some ecoinvent v2 datasets, the field includedActivities contains redundant information that should be removed when updating, for example information on which raw materials, infrastructure or transport is included or which emissions are included, both types of information already being provided in the information on the exchanges.]

5.9.2 General principles for elementary exchanges
Elementary exchanges (exchanges with the environment) are only registered once and on the most de- tailed level for
which information is available. Benzene emissions for instance are reported as such but not as "aromatic hydrocarbons",
nor as "non methane volatile organic compounds". If benzene and total NMVOC emissions have both been measured and
reported, the amount of benzene emitted is subtracted from the amount of NMVOC emission, to avoid double counting.
Elementary exchanges are classified with the help of compartments and sub-compartments. Compart- ments describe to where
elementary exchanges are emitted (air, water, soil). Within these compart- ments, sub-compartments further distinguish
issues relevant for the subsequent impact assessment step, e.g. population density.
Each elementary exchange is recorded only once. Hence, if appropriate, one may add up the elemen- tary exchanges of all
sub-compartments to get the total amount of an elementary exchange of the compartment. For example, one might add up the
amounts of all "Carbon monoxide, fossil" emitted to "air/high population density",  "air/low population density",
air/lower stratosphere + upper tropo- sphere", and air/unspecified" to get the total amount of fossil CO emitted to air.
The particulate emissions are reported in classes of <2.5 m, between 2.5 m and 10 m, and >10 m. In order to get the
amount of PM10 emitted, one may add up the results of particulates emis- sions of <2.5 m, and between 2.5 m and 10 m (
named "Particulates, < 2.5 um" and "Particulates, > 2.5 um, and < 10um").
The only exception to this rule is the reporting for some sum parameters for water pollutants, i.e., the four parameters
BOD5, COD, DOC, and TOC (see Section5.9.7), and the (minor) double-counting of
mass implied by reporting particulate emissions as both particulates and as specific substance emis-
sions (see section5.9.4), both in mass units.

5.9.3 Resources
[Feature considered for implementation later: The extraction of metals and other minerals in ores is recorded as the amount of target material that is contained in the ore. In metals mining often two or more metals are mined together. The corresponding resources are recorded on the level of individual resources, e.g. 0.12 kg “Phosphorus, in ground” and 0.03 kg “Fluorine, in ground” . The additional content of non-used (gangue) material is added as a separate input, e.g. 0.85 kg “Gangue, fluorapatite ore, in ground”, so that the total amount of extracted material (here 1 kg) is recorded.]
Non-renewable energy resources like oil and gas are provided in weight or volume units and with the properties dry mass
and energy content in energy units.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: In version 2, different ores are reported separately with their composition of
different metals. For version 3, the nature of the ore (mineral/concentration) is now [planned to be] given as a
property for each metal resource. The necessary translation from the old to the new format is performed as a central
database maintenance task. Affected dataset authors and editors will be informed.]

5.9.4 Airborne particulates
Particulate emissions are separated according to the diameter class. Three categories are distin- guished, namely less
than 2.5 micron, between 2.5 and 10 micron, and more than 10 micron (see Ta- ble 5.3). With that, double counting of
particulate emissions is avoided. It has to be noted that these classes do not coincide with the standard measurements
which distinguish between less than 2.5 mi- cron (PM2.5), less than 10 micron (PM10) and total particulate matter (TPM).
The values recorded in

the ecoinvent database are derived from the standard measurements with the calculation procedure explained in Table 5.3.

Tab. 5.3 Names and characteristics of particulate elementary exchanges as reported in the ecoinvent database.

Name Formula Remarks
Particulates, < 2.5 um PM2.5 particulates with a diameter of less than 2.5 µm
Particulates, > 2.5 um and < 10 um PM10-PM2.5 particulates with a diameter of more than 2.5 µm and less than 10 µm
Particulates, > 10 um TPM-PM10 particulates with a diameter of more than 10 µm and less than 100 µm
PM2.5 particulate matter with a diameter of less than 2.5 µm
PM10 particulate matter with a diameter of less than 10 µm
TPM total particulate matter

Particulate emissions are inventoried as particulates and as specific substance emissions, implying a (minor)
double-counting of mass.
As a first priority, particulate emission factors as well as information about its size distribution are taken from the
particular information source. If no information is available about the size and/or its distribution, standard reference
works are used according to the following fixed order:

1. The Co-ordinated European Programme on Particulate Matter Emission Inventories, Projections and Guidance (CEPMEIP)
   Database, (Berdowski et al. 2002),
2. A Framework to Estimate the Potential and Costs for the Control of Fine Particulate Emissions in Europe (Lükewill
   2001),
3. Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors AP-42, Fifth Edition, Volume I: Stationary Point and Area Sources,
   Appendix B. 1: Particle Size Distribution Data and Sized Emission Factors for Selected Sources (US-EPA 1986).

5.9.5 Volatile organic compounds - VOC
Because of its particular importance with respect to global warming, methane and non-methane vola- tile organic
compounds (NMVOC) emissions are accounted separately.
Further specifications within the NMVOCs are applied as far as possible. Among the large number of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons, at least Benzo(a)pyrene is recorded separately.
Dioxins and furanes are recorded as TCDD-equivalents. The equivalency factors of the NATO/CCMS weighting schema are
applied (see for instance Frischknecht et al. 1996, part III, p. 27).

5.9.6 Other air pollutants
SOX and NOX emissions are reported as SO2 and NO2, respectively. When information is available, the shares of SO3- or
SO42- emissions, and NO emissions, respectively, are subtracted from the total SOX and NOX emissions, and reported
separately. This differentiation is also made in the impact as- sessment methods.
Trace element emissions into air are recorded as chemical compounds if information is available. They are recorded as
e.g. "kg Sodium dichromate". In all other cases just the amount of chemical ele- ment released is recorded. A
differentiation according to currently used impact assessment methods is aimed at. No sum parameters such as "metals"
are used.

5.9.7 Sum parameters for carbon compounds (BOD5, COD, DOC, TOC)
In the ecoinvent datasets all four sum parameters BOD5, COD, DOC and TOC4 are recorded in paral- lel (i.e., without any
reductions due to separately reported individual substances). If necessary (no sum parameter measurements available)
they are calculated from the information given for individual water pollutants. For that purpose the stoichiometric
oxygen demand for the oxidation is calculated to quantify the COD. The amount of TOC and DOC is determined from the
carbon content of the indi- vidual substances and based on the recommendations of de Beaufort-Langeveld et al. (2003).
Missing data are added using best estimates. DOC = TOC in a filtered sample, and in general the rules of thumb COD (g
O2) = 2.7*TOC (g C) and BOD5 = 0.5*COD can be applied to untreated waste wa- ter. The BOD/COD ratio depends on the
biodegradability of the organic material. At full biodegrada- bility BOD = COD. For domestic wastewater values up to
BOD5 = 0.75*COD can be found and for food industries BOD5 = 0.9*COD. For wastewaters with low nutrient content relative
to carbon, such as from chemical plants and in cleaned wastewaters, the ratio can be as low as BOD5 = 0.2*COD and when
having passed a nutrient elimination step BOD5 = 0.05*COD.
All individual substances are additionally recorded in the inventory. For the assessment of aquatic eu- trophication or
other impacts, it is sufficient to select one of the above-mentioned sum parameters. No double counting occurs as long
as only one parameter and no individual substances are considered in this assessment.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The worst-case assumption BOD = COD has been re- moved as recommendation.]

5.9.8 Other sum parameters (AOX, etc.)
Individual substances are subtracted from other sum parameters used in the analytics of water, such as AOX or total
nitrogen.

5.10 No cut-offs
No strict quantitative cut-off rule is followed in the ecoinvent database. Datasets are as complete as the knowledge of
the data providers allow.
No cut-offs are applied for recycling. Recycled by-products are treated as any other by-product.
If no specific information about the exact substance or its amount is available, an educated guess is made based on
plausibility considerations. In cases where such assumptions dominate the LCA result, further and more detailed
investigations are carried out and some of the values reconsidered. If the rough assumption does not influence the
result, it does not harm and is kept in the inventory.
The ecoinvent database does not operate with cut-off levels for minor inputs or outputs. In principle, all known inputs
and outputs are recorded as such.
This approach does imply some risk of bias in the results if comparing activities or product systems where detailed
information is available for one while not for the other. The ecoinvent Centre currently carries out research to
minimise such bias by increasing the completeness of the reporting of specific toxic exchanges, as well as other
exchanges that contribute significantly to the overall environmental impact of human activities.

4 BOD5
COD
DOC
TOC Biological oxygen demand in five days Chemical oxygen demand
Dissolved organic carbon
Total organic carbon

[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: In version 2, cut-offs were applied to by-products for re- cycling.]
