6      Completeness


This Chapter is concerned with completeness of individual datasets. The completeness of the database
is discussed in Chapter13on “Embedding new datasets into the database” .

6.1      Stoichiometrics
If data availability is poor, stoichiometric balances are used to determine the raw materials demand. If no specific information is available, a 95% yield is assumed. Such modelling choices are documented in the datasets.

6.2      Mass balances
For each activity, the law of conservation of mass and energy applies. This implies that the mass and energy in and out of each activity is the same, when taking into account changes in stocks. Only for activities involving nuclear reactions these balances interact. This is also true for each element. Thus, separate mass and elemental balances apply to all activities except those involving nuclear reactions.
Dry mass and water mass are available (reported or calculated) for each resource input, for each in- termediate exchange of products and wastes, as well as for emissions. This includes water resource use, and nitrogen and oxygen from air entering into activities involving combustion, photosynthesis and biological metabolism, and the air emissions of water vapour and oxygen and nitrogen from these activities as calculated from the reaction equations. For example, the oxygen demand for combustion is calculated from the oxides (notably CO, CO2, SO2, NO2, and N2O) in combustion exhaust. Thus, complete mass balances (sum of outputs minus sum of inputs) for the unit processes can be calculated and any deviations reported, either in the validation report or as an “unspecified output, from mass balance” . Note that a dry matter balance may include water when this is incorporated as or released from chemical reactions involving chemically bound H and O, and that this water is not included in water balances.
In addition to the dry matter balance, mass balances for selected chemical elements can be performed when specific information on the content of these elements is provided for all relevant inputs and out- puts to an activity. Currently, this is only done systematically for fossil and non-fossil carbon.
Mass balances have been implemented as a validation feature, and the sums and their difference (e.g. "Input > output by X [unit] (0.01% of output)" is displayed as a warning in the validation result. There is currently no minimum requirement for the deviation.
Conditional exchanges are not included in mass balances; see Chapter11.4.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: Mass balancing is a new option, enabled by the option to add properties to all exchanges. There is currently no requirement for datasets to be mass balanced.]

6.3      Energy balances
Energy content is not a required property of exchanges in the ecoinvent database. Therefore, it is also not possible to provide complete energy balances of all activities or product systems. The total fossil and nuclear fuel inputs and Cumulative Energy Demand (fossil and nuclear) may still be calculated from the resource inputs of fossil and nuclear fuels.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: Waste heat emissions and energy content of renewable energy resource inputs have been removed.]




6.4      Monetary balances
Although there is no “law of conservation of money”, a monetary balance applies to each activity, ex- pressed in the so-called accounting equation, which is the foundation for the double-entry bookkeep- ing system. Thus, all revenue earned must also be spent, when taking into account changes in savings.
Using the price information reported for each intermediate input and output, monetary balances can be established for each activity. The balancing element accounting for the difference between the val- ue of the outputs (revenue) of an activity, and the value of the inputs of intermediate products (includ- ing investments) to this activity, is the elementary input  “Expenditures on primary production fac- tors”, measured in monetary units, which may be calculated as the unspecified residual in the mone- tary balance. When more information is available, this may be divided in the following components:
    Labour cost (wages and other remunerations), possibly further sub-divided on income group or
education level of the workers
    Net tax (taxes minus subsidies)
    Net operating surplus (entrepreneur’s income or profit)
    Rent (payment to resource owners)
The  “Expenditures on primary production factors” are also called value added. In national account- ing practice, rent is included with the net operating surplus and the term value added is used for the payments to the primary production factors including investments, although the value added of in- vestments is already counted once in the industries supplying the investment goods . In national ac- counting, the value added of an activity is the same as its contribution to the gross domestic product (GDP).
To ensure their inclusion in the monetary balance, the Expenditures on primary production factors and/or its components all have “price” as a property, even when the amounts of these exchanges are already measured in monetary units. When expressed in the same units as the amount of the exchang- es, the amount of the price property is  1. Labour cost has the additional property ‘working time’ which is related to the price via the cost per hour.
An activity does not necessarily pay for all its inputs; some may be supplied to the activity “for free”, e.g. as a public service such as road infrastructure or hospital services . The physical relationship (cau- sality) is then not matched by a direct economic relationship. However, a service or a good supplied
“for free” typically means that someone else has paid for the costs of this good or service, which is
thus an economic externality; see Chapter 6.11. To avoid double-counting, such externalities are not reported as externalities in the ecoinvent database, but are instead included directly (internalised) as intermediate inputs to the activity. When internalising an economic externality, the activity that origi- nally paid for the good or service is relieved of this cost, which instead adds to the total intermediate costs of the activity that previously received this input for free. The economic balances of the activi- ties are maintained by adjusting the Net tax of the activities, which is equivalent to modelling a subsi- dy.
Note that internalisation is also relevant when the good or service is already covered specifically by a dedicated tax, reported under Net tax of an activity, since this tax is not linked to any physical inputs. In fact, any dedicated tax or subsidy, i.e. a tax or subsidy that is dedicated to be used for a specific ac- tivity, should be internalised in this way, to correctly model the physical causalities.
However, whether a “free” good or service is included as input to an activity or not is sometimes de- pendent on a judgement of what constitutes a physical causality. For example, it is obvious that road infrastructure is to be included as an in input to road transport even when it is not paid for directly by the vehicle operators, rather than being a stand-alone final consumption item (as it is in many national accounts), but it may be less obvious whether or to what extent the road transport dataset should have



an input of health care in proportion to the additional health care required to treat victims of road in- cidents, or an input compensating for the time lost in queuing from other users of the same infrastruc- ture. For details of such modelling decisions, the database user must consult the relevant individual datasets. In general, the ecoinvent database strives to include (internalise) all well-documented physi- cal causalities, disregarding whether they are matched by a direct economic relationship.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The option to make a monetary balance is new, and is re- lated to the requirement that price information is added to all intermediate exchanges.]

6.5      Elementary exchanges
In the ecoinvent database no predefined, limited list of elementary exchanges is applied. Complete- ness in elementary exchanges is aimed for. Specific development projects are performed by the ecoin- vent Centre to fill gaps in the data.

6.6     Water
Water enters from the environment into human activities as a resource input like any other resource, specified by its location or origin (distinguishing groundwater, surface water, sea water, and rain wa- ter). The quality of the water resource can be further specified by its properties. Relevant properties may be COD, BOD, TSS, TDS, and faecal coliform bacteria. Water resources and water transferred from other watersheds are reported in volume, while the ‘water mass’ property is used to quantify the mass of water inputs for use in water balances. Water balances also include water bound in extracted minerals, water bound in biological material harvested in the wild, and water in intermediate inputs, all quantified in the ‘water mass’ property of these exchanges.
The input of water can be balanced with an equivalent output in intermediate outputs, water trans- ferred to other watersheds, and outputs to different environmental compartments (air, soil, groundwa- ter, ocean and surface water, see Chapter 9.4.2). Note that any pollution/contamination of the water emitted to the environment is not specified as properties of the water, but only as separate exchanges
(including e.g., COD, BOD, faecal coliform bacteria, and temperature, when relevant), in order to avoid double-counting in the impact assessment.
If the exact origin and/or destination of the freshwater exchanges are unknown, they are entered as in- puts from and/or outputs to the environmental sub-compartment ‘water, unspecified’ .
[Feature considered for implementation later: It is considered to include inputs and outputs of wa- ter used for cooling in separate activities that produce cooling rather than in the activities that require cooling.]

6.7      Land occupation and land transformation
Land occupation and land transformation receives increasing attention in life cycle inventory analyses and life cycle impact assessment methods. It is especially important for agricultural and forestry prod- ucts.
Table 6.1 shows the land use classes used for the ecoinvent database. The land use classes and the de- scriptions in the Table are based on a draft version of the Handbook on LCIA of Global Land Use      within the framework ofthe UNEP/SETAC Life Cycle Initiative.



Table 6.1. Land use classes used in the ecoinvent database. Table continues on next page.


Land use class	Description
Unspecified	
Unspecified, natural (non-use)	
Forest, unspecified	Areas with tree cover >15%.
Forest, primary (non-use)	Forests (tree cover >15%), minimally disturbed by humans, where ﬂora and fauna species abundance is near pristine.
Forest, secondary (non-use)	Areas originally covered with forest or woodlands (tree cover >15%), where vegetation has been removed, forest is re-growing and is no longer in use.

Forest, extensive	Forests (tree cover >15%), with extractive use and associated disturbance like hunting, and selective logging, where timber extraction is followed by re-growth including at least three    naturally occurring tree species, with average stand age >30 years and deadwood > 10 cm diameter exceeds 5 times the annual harvest volume.

Forest, intensive	Forests (tree cover >15%), with extractive use, with either even-aged stands or clear-cut patches exceeding 250 m length, or less than three naturally occurring species at plant- ing/seeding, or average stand age <30 years, or deadwood less than 5 times the annual harvest volume.
Wetland, coastal (non-use)	Areas tidally, seasonally or permanently waterlogged with brackish or saline water. Includes costal marshland and mangrove. Excludes coastal land with infrastructure or agriculture.
Wetland, inland (non-use)	Areas partially, seasonally or permanently waterlogged. The water may be stagnant or cir- culating. Includes inland marshland, swamp forests and peat bogs.
Shrub land, sclerophyllous	Shrub-dominated vegetation. May be used or non-used. Includes also abandoned agricul- tural areas, not yet under forest cover
Grassland, natural (non-use)	Grassland vegetation with scattered shrubs or trees (e.g., steppe, tundra, savanna).
Grassland, natural, for livestock grazing	Grasslands where wildlife is replaced by grazing livestock.
Arable land, unspecified use	Land suitable for crop production, in unspecified use
Pasture, man made	Arable land used for forage production or livestock grazing.
Pasture, man made, extensive	+ no artificial fertiliser applied, mechanically harvested less than 3 times per year or equiva- lent livestock grazing
Pasture, man made, intensive	+ artificial fertiliser applied, or mechanically harvested 3 times or more per year or equiva- lent livestock grazing
Annual crop	Cultivated areas with crops that occupy the land < 1 year, e.g. cereals, fodder crops, root   crops, or vegetables. Includes aromatic, medicinal and culinary plant production and flower and tree nurseries.
Annual crop, non-irrigated	Annual crop production based on natural precipitation (rainfed agriculture).
Annual crop, non-irrigated, ex- tensive	+ Use of fertiliser and pesticides is significantly less than economically optimal.
Annual crop, non-irrigated, in- tensive	+ Fertiliser and pesticides at or near the economically optimal level.
Annual crop, irrigated	Annual crops irrigated permanently or periodically. Most of these crops could not be culti- vated without an artificial water supply. Does not include sporadically irrigated land.
Annual crop, irrigated, extensive	+ Use of fertilizer and pesticides is significantly less than economically optimal.
Annual crop, irrigated, intensive	+ Fertiliser and pesticides at or near the economically optimal level.
Annual crop, flooded crop	Areas for rice cultivation. Flat surfaces with irrigation channels. Surfaces regularly flooded.
Annual crop, greenhouse	Crop production under plastic or glass.
Field margin/hedgerow	Land between fields with natural vegetation.
Heterogeneous, agricultural	Agricultural production intercropped with (native) trees.
Permanent crop	Perennial crops not under a rotation system which provide repeated harvests and occupy   the land for >1 year before it is ploughed and replanted; mainly plantations of woody crops.
Permanent crop, non-irrigated	Perennial crops production based on natural precipitation (rainfed agriculture).
Permanent crop, non-irrigated, extensive	+ Use of fertilizer and pesticides is less than economically optimal.
Permanent crop, non-irrigated, intensive	+ Fertiliser and pesticides at economically optimal level.
Permanent crop, irrigated	Perennial crops irrigated permanently or periodically. Most of these crops could not be culti- vated without an artificial water supply. Does not include sporadically irrigated land.
Permanent crop, irrigated, ex- tensive	+ Use of fertilizer and pesticides is significantly less than economically optimal.
Permanent crop, irrigated, inten- sive	+ Fertiliser and pesticides at or near the economically optimal level.
Cropland fallow (non-use)	Cropland, temporarily not in use (<2 years).
Urban/industrial fallow (non-use)	Areas with remains of industrial buildings; deposits of rubble, gravel, sand and industrial waste. Can be vegetated.




Table 6.1., continued. Land use classes used in the ecoinvent database.

Land use class	Description
Urban, continuously built	Buildings cover most of the area. Roads and artificially surfaced area cover almost all the ground. Non-linear areas of vegetation and bare soil are exceptional. At least 80% of the total area is sealed.
Urban, discontinuously built	Most of the area is covered by structures. Buildings, roads and artificially surfaced areas,    associated with areas with vegetation and bare soil, which occupy discontinuous but signifi- cant surfaces. Less than 80% of the total area is sealed.
Urban, green area	Areas with vegetation within urban fabric. Includes parks with vegetation.
Industrial area	Artificially surfaced areas (with concrete, asphalt, or stabilized, e.g., beaten earth) devoid of vegetation on most of the area in question, which also contains buildings and/or areas with vegetation.
Mineral extraction site	Areas with open-pit extraction of industrial minerals (sandpits, quarries) or other minerals (opencast mines). Includes flooded gravel quarries, except for riverbed extraction.
Dump site	Landfill or mine dump sites, industrial or public.
Construction site	Areas under construction development, soil or bedrock excavations, earthworks.
Traffic area, road network	Motorways, including associated installations (stations).
Traffic area, rail network	Railways, including associated installations (stations, platforms).
Traffic area, rail/road embank- ment	Vegetated land along motorways and railways.
Bare area (non-use)	Areas permanently without vegetation (e.g., deserts, high alpine areas).
Snow and ice (non-use)	Areas permanently covered with snow or ice considered as undisturbed areas.
Inland waterbody, unspecified	Freshwater bodies.
River, natural (non-use)	Natural watercourses.
Lake, natural (non-use)	Natural stretches of water.
River, artificial	Artificial watercourses serving as water drainage channels. Includes canals.
Lake, artificial	Reservoir in a valley because of damming up river.
Seabed, unspecified	Area permanently under seawater.
Seabed, natural (non-use)	Natural seabed.
Seabed, bottom fishing	Seabed disturbed by bottom trawling or fishing dredge
Seabed, sediment displacement	Seabed disturbed by dumping or shellfish- or sediment-dredging
Seabed, infrastructure	Seabed disturbed by infrastructure like harbours or platforms
Seabed, drilling and mining	Seabed disturbed by drilling and mining, including cuttings and tailings disposal
It should be noted that the land use classes are not intended to capture specific emissions, such as the CO2  emissions after forest clearing. Such emissions are therefore separately included in the datasets for the specific crops that are grown on such recently transformed land.
Outlook: It is currently being researched if continuous indicators such as NPP can be used as the basic variables of the land exchanges, so that the land use classes are only provided as default options (i.e. with their specific description in terms of the continuous variables). This would allow data providers to define new land use classes as long as they are defined in terms of the underlying variables.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: New land use classes have been added, and some previ- ously separate categories have been aggregated. The definitions of the land use classes have been im- proved.]
The ecoinvent database covers both direct and indirect (upstream) land use effects, in the same way as the indirect (upstream) uses of all other resources are covered. In fact, the distinction between direct and indirect land use is only relevant when seen from the perspective of one particular unit process, since all exchanges are direct to the specific activity in which they occur, and indirect for all down- stream activities.
Land use is inventoried through the use of data on:
    Land occupation for the current land use (the occupied land is prevented from changing to a more
natural state).



    Land transformation (from previous land use and to current land use, e.g., the conversion of a
former natural area to industrial land; the conversion of a gravel quarry to a natural area by active re-cultivation).
For land occupation, both the area and the duration required for the production of a certain amount of products and services are important. Therefore, land occupation is recorded in area*time (m2 *year). Clearly defined and relatively short temporary changes in the land use are also recorded as land occu- pation (e.g. the construction of underground natural gas pipelines, which temporarily converts agricul- tural land to an excavation site). For these construction activities as well as for active restoration ac-
tivities after decommissioning, the land use category "land occupation, construction site" is applied. A land transformation consists of two entries:
1.   Land transformation, from land use class X, and
2.   Land transformation, to land use class Y.
Example: "Transformation, from forest", in m2 and "transformation, to mineral extraction site", also in m2 . Land transformation thus records a state before and after a transformation.
An activity that requires land for a specific use may obtain the land tenure rights on a general market for land tenure that is supplied by all the different land classes available for this market, including land already in use, newly transformed land, and efficiency improvements on outputs from current land uses (which substitute for land). Land with different productivity (potential net primary produc- tivity, NPP, measured in kg carbon per m2 *year) can be inputs to the same markets for land tenure. Land tenure is therefore generally expressed in kg C. The same default modelling rules are applied for land tenure markets as for all other market activities in ecoinvent (e.g. that unless local market bound- aries can be justified, a global market is assumed, etc.).
The land tenure markets may be common to more specific land uses. For example, the ‘market for ar- able land tenure’ may supply land to both an annual crop production and a gravel quarry (since gravel quarries are most often placed on land suitable for agriculture). While the more general ‘transfor- mation, to arable land, unspecified use’ and ‘occupation of arable land, unspecified use’ are recorded in upstream inputs to the ‘market for arable land tenure’, the more specific transformation from ‘ara- ble land, unspecified use’ to ‘annual crop’ or ‘mineral extraction site’ as well as the more specific ‘occupation, annual crop’ and ‘occupation, mineral extraction site’ are recorded directly in the activi- ties with these land uses. Thereby, the transformation and occupation recorded by these more specific land use classes can be used in impact assessment to represent the additional transformation impact or the difference in occupation impacts relative to the more general impacts of the unspecific transfor- mation and occupation recorded upstream.
While land tenure (and possibly more specific transformation and occupation) is generally included as an input to the infrastructure production activities, agricultural and forest land requirements are rec- orded as inputs to the operation activities as long as they do not include buildings. Land tenure re- quired by buildings, greenhouses and the like are recorded as inputs to the infrastructure dataset .
For particular activities the land use class before starting the activity may well be known. However, it is often difficult to assess in detail all the land use classes which have been converted by the activities recorded within the ecoinvent database. If the land use class before the operation phase of the activity is not known, no specific transformation is recorded, and only the average transformation is provided by the relevant land tenure market.
Land transformation at the end of an activity may be relevant for some activities such as road con- struction, power plant erection, active mine restoration, land abandoned and subjected to natural suc- cession, etc.). However, the transformation at the end is usually not considered, i.e. when the follow- ing activity is assumed to start from the state of the current activity or when it can be assumed that the land use is not likely to change at the end of the activity (no transformation from “industrial area” to “unknown” at the end of life of a factory, transport infrastructure, or agricultural land).



The above-described approach is illustrated with the following simplified example of gravel extrac- tion:
     The output of the infrastructure dataset "gravel quarry construction, with active recultivation” is
given in m2, and the land use is thus directly related to this unit.
    Potential net primary productivity (NPP) of the arable land used for the quarry is 0.5 kg C /
m2 *year.
     The gravel quarry is utilised for 20 years, followed by 2 years of restoration activities, resulting in
secondary forest.
     The recultivation uses 0.02 kg fertiliser-N and 4.3 MJ diesel per m2 .
The resulting inventory for the infrastructure activity "gravel quarry construction, with active reculti- vation” is shown in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2. Example of unit process raw data for gravel quarry construction, including direct and indirect (upstream) land transformation and land occupation.

	unit process raw data	Intermediate LCI result
	gravel quarry
construction,
with active
recultivation	market for
land ten-
ure, arable
land	intensifica-
tion, arable
land	clear-
cutting,
primary
forest to
arable land	land al-
ready in
use, arable
land	gravel quarry
construction,
with active
recultivation
	1 m2 gravel quarry	1 kg NPP-
C arable
land tenure	1 kg NPP-
C arable
land tenure	1 kg NPP-
C arable
land tenure	1 kg NPP-
C arable
land tenure	1 m2 gravel quarry
Resource inputs:	Unit:						
Occupation, mineral extraction site	m2year	20					20
Occupation, construction site	m2year	2					2
Occupation, arable land, un- specified use	m2year					1.64	17.6
Transformation, from forest, primary (non-use)	2				1.37		0.075
Transformation, to arable land, unspecified use	2				1.37		0.075
Transformation, from arable land, unspecified use	2	1					1
Transformation, to mineral ex- traction site	2	1					1
Transformation, from mineral extraction site	2	1					1
Transformation, to forest, sec- ondary (non-use)	2	1					1
Intermediate inputs:							
land tenure, arable land	kg NPP-C	11					
land tenure, arable land (from intensification, arable land)	kg NPP-C		0.02				
land tenure, arable land (from clear-cutting, primary forest to arable land)	kg NPP-C		0.005				
land tenure, arable land (from    land already in use, arable land)	kg NPP-C		0.975				
nitrogen fertiliser, as N	kg	0.02		0.023			0.025
Diesel	MJ	4.3					4.3
...	...						...




The land tenure requirement is calculated by multiplying the area by the NPP and by the quarry life- time, including the 2 years of restoration: 1 m2  * 0.5 kg C/m2 *year * 22 year) = 11 kg C/m2 quarry. In this simplified example, these 11 kg C are supplied by the “market for land tenure, arable land” with 97.5% from “land already in use, arable land” (which includes the “indirect” part of the occupation, calculated from the NPP of average arable land of 0.61 kg C / m2 *year), 2% from intensification of production on this land (requiring 0.023 kg N to increase production equivalent to 1 kg NPP-C) and with 0.5% from deforestation (which carries the “indirect” land transformation, calculated from the NPP of average deforested land of 0.73 kg C / m2 *year). The two transformations "to mineral extrac- tion site" and "from mineral extraction site" cancel each other out. In the column "LCI result", one can see that the net transformation is 1 m2 to secondary forest with 0.075 m2  coming from primary forest (the “indirect” land transformation) and 0.925 m2 from arable land.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: Transformation at the end of an activity is now added also for land abandoned and subjected to natural succession. The use of ‘default use periods’ (standard as- sumptions for lengths of production cycles) has been abandoned. The land occupation and land trans- formation is now typically included in separate datasets delivering ‘land tenure’ expressed in g NPP- C, which is then an input to the specific transforming datasets that require land tenure. Thereby, indi- rect land use is seamlessly included in complete parallel to all other upstream resource uses. In ver- sion 2 datasets, tropical wood from clear-cut was modelled as co-product of land transformation from forest to agricultural land. This is revised so that each cause of land transformation is modelled sepa- rately, i.e. ‘forestry’ and ‘clear-cutting, primary forest to arable land’ are separate activities with each their own land use impacts.]

6.8      Noise
Outlook: Noise is one of the new elementary exchanges that are considered to be added to the ecoin- vent database.

6.9      Incidents and accidents
Accidents are unexpected, unusual, unintended and unpredictable events, and are not included in the ecoinvent database. Examples of accidents which are not considered are the serious accidents in nu- clear power plants, e.g. Chernobyl, which might have very dramatic impacts, but which occur only seldom.
On the other hand, incidents that can be calculated probabilistically and occur so frequently that the annual  average  is not  influenced  significantly by each individual  incident,  are  considered in the ecoinvent activity datasets. An example of an incident is an oil spill due to rupture of a transport pipe- line. Such spills occur frequently and are reported regularly.
Enterprises with additional safety measures may have lower occurrences of incidents and this may warrant a separate dataset for such enterprises.

6.10    Litter
Although litter is by its nature an exchange to the environment, since it does not undergo any further treatment, recording litter as such would imply the addition of many new elementary exchanges with little added value for the impact assessment. Therefore, the further fate of litter in nature is added as human treatment activities, similar to surface landfills and/or aquatic deposits.


6.11    Economic externalities
Economic externalities are costs paid or benefits received by parties not operating or in control of the reported activities, and not part of the price of the products.
Examples of such external costs for e.g. a road transport activity are the use of public infrastructure, time lost in queuing by other users of the same infrastructure, and accident and health services, to the extent that this is not covered by insurances or specific taxes paid by the transport activity. Examples of external benefits (typically reported as negative costs) are e.g. the free provision of infrastructure (“free rider” situations), education and other public services. External benefits are most often related to public production or voluntary private provision of such services. It is also possible to find exam- ples of private goods and services where it is simply impossible for the supplier to ensure that all par- ties that benefit from the good or service actually pay for this.
An external cost of one activity is typically an external benefit provided by another activity and vice versa. In the ecoinvent database such externalities are therefore included directly (internalised) as in- termediate inputs to the activities, see Chapter6.4, rather than being separately reported as economic externalities.

6.12    Social externalities
Social externalities, i.e. changes in social pressures that may affect human well-being but are not of a biophysical or economic nature (i.e. not covered via the use of natural resources, emissions, or trans- fer of economic costs and benefits) may be added as elementary exchanges.
Examples of social externalities are occupational health issues (lost work-days), excess work (hours worked in excess of 48 per week), work-place stress, un-organised labour, and injuries (not limited to work-related injuries).
Positive social externalities can be e.g. provision of access to pensions and social security, where these benefits are not provided by the public authorities, efforts to alleviate poverty by provision of products that are targeted the poor, recruitment of workers in long-term unemployment, and support to terminated workers.
In contrast to the economic externalities described in Chapter6.11, social externalities are not paid for or provided by other activities, e.g. the lost work-days are not compensated, but are simply lost. This implies that the same issue can sometimes be an economic externality and sometimes a social exter- nality. For example, education provided for free can be an economic externality, since it is paid for by someone and provided by a specific activity, while lost education opportunities (e.g. due to child la- bour) can be a social externality.
Data on social externalities are currently not included in the ecoinvent database, but we encourage da- ta providers to suggest systematic inclusion of new indicators for social externalities.
