9 Naming conventions

9.1 General
It is strived for to use the most common technical nomenclature and units, and avoiding the use of ab- breviations. All
information in the name fields is written in full. Considering that the database is used by people from many different
technical and non-technical fields, it is strived for to make the names generally understandable and provide adequate
context, e.g. rather “electrical connector, peripheral component interconnect buss” than “bus, PCI” . No brackets are
used, except when required by other conventions, e.g. in chemical formulas. Singular is used as far as possible, e.g.
“barley grain”, not “barley grains” .
The lists of names for activities, intermediate exchanges, elementary exchanges, units, classifications and tags,
geographical locations, macro-economic scenarios, and system models, are centrally collect- ed and managed. The full
list of names is available via the ecoEditor software. Likewise, master files are centrally collected and managed for
persons, default properties and parameters, and sources.

9.2 Activities
An activity dataset is identified uniquely by its activity name, the geographical location (see Chapter 4.2.1), the time
period (see Chapter 4.2.2), the macro-economic scenario (see Chapter4.2.3), and the system model (see Chapter4.13.2).
The first four of these identifying fields, i.e. all except the system model, are represented by a universally unique
identifier (UUID) for easy machine identification. This implies that the UUID of an activity dataset is the same in all
system models, which facilitates the linking of the datasets in different system models, see Chapter14. In addition, all
activities are classi-
fied according to the ISIC classification with further sub-divisions made by ecoinvent (see Chapter
9.7).
Activity names are spelled with lower case starting letter, i.e. “lime production”, not “Lime produc- tion” .
The simplest form of an activity name is generated from the name of the reference product (see be- low) with the
addition “production”, e.g. “lime production” after the product “lime” . Further specifi- cations of the product, raw
material or production route are added after a comma, e.g. “lime produc- tion, from carbonation” . The term
“construction” is used instead of “production” for activities that have buildings, transport infrastructure, factories
and facilities as their product outputs.
If the activity has multiple products, the activity can instead be named after the nature of the process, e.g. “air
separation, cryogenic” with the products “oxygen”, “nitrogen” and “argon” .
When an activity is described in terms of the process of converting a raw material to a product, the order [process]
, [raw material], [detail of process] is preferred, e.g. “leaching of spodumene with sul- phuric acid”, not “sulphuric
acid leaching of spodumene”, thus avoiding to place the raw material in the beginning of the activity name.
Whenever possible, the “…ing” ending is reserved for services and avoided for activities with a mate- rial product.
For infrastructure, the name “factory” or “facility” is preferred to “plant”, except in traditional combi- nations such
as “power plant” .
Dedicated treatment activities are preferably named “treatment of [material treated]
, [nature or output of the treatment]”, e.g. “treatment of waste paint, sanitary landfill“, “treatment of slaughterhouse
waste, rendering” or “treatment of biogas, purification to methane 96 vol-%” .

Production and supply mixes end with the terms “, production mix” and “, supply mix” respectively. Market activities
start with the term “market for ”.
Activity datasets with the term “operation” as part of their name signifies activities that use specific
infrastructures, e.g. “mine operation” as opposed to “mine construction” . Operation datasets therefore always have
inputs of infrastructure. Thus, “operation” is used as a synonym for “use” . The term is used both for industrial
activities and household activities.
The geographical and temporal locations of activities are described in separate data fields and are not required in the
name field.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The naming conventions are more stringent in some as- pects. The unit is no longer an identifying field, i.e. the same dataset cannot exist with different units for the reference product. Different units can instead be applied for properties of the reference prod- uct. Datasets in version 2, which are found in duplicate units, have been merged to one dataset, choos- ing the most appropriate unit as the main unit and adding a property with the secondary unit.]

9.3 Intermediate exchanges / Products and wastes
Names of intermediate exchanges are spelled with lower case starting letter, i.e. “lime”, not “Lime” .
Product names begin with the most generic form of the product that is generally recognized as a prod- uct, e.g. “cement,
blast furnace slag” rather than ”blast furnace slag cement”, but avoiding artificial names, e.g. not “fertiliser,
nitrogen” but “nitrogen fertiliser” . This should make searching for a specif- ic product easier. The alternative name
may be added as a synonym. It is difficult to make product names unambiguous. The general rules may be interpreted
differently by different data providers, so that the two examples just provided may be reversed by different data
providers. Therefore, it is al- ways a good idea to search the database for different possible spellings and ordering of
product names, especially before adding a new product and/or activity name to the database.
Following the product name, additional specifications are added if necessary for an unequivocal dis- tinction. These are
separated by commas, and in the following sequence: treatment level (like rolled, drawn or coated), additional
description of the product characteristics or intended application, addi- tional description of unit, additional
description of provenience/raw material. Indication of the pro- duction route or specific product characteristics are
only included if this is part of the marketable
product properties, i.e. if there is a market or market niche where the production route or property is a part of the
obligatory product properties, see Chapter 4.4.5. For example, the product “straw” is named as such, not with separate
names for “barley straw” and “wheat straw”, since the market for straw does not distinguish between these two products.
Temporal markets, customer segments and market niches are reflected in the product name, so that each temporal and
customer segment or niche
has its own product. The product name includes as far as possible all relevant aspects of the obligato- ry product
properties required by the supplied market, customer segment or niche.
Additional description of the unit is only included when this is not obvious from the context. This is especially
relevant when the unit is dimensionless, e.g. “unit”, and this relates to a specific interpreta- tion, e.g. “per pig
place”, which is then included in the name.
For dissolved chemicals, the traditional nomenclature of the chemical industry is to indicate the active substance and
then add the water separately, so that e.g. 1 kg of “sodium hydroxide, without water, in 50% solution state”, refers to
the production of 2 kg NaOH solution with a water content of 50%, i.e., 1 kg pure NaOH plus 1 kg pure H2O (by specifying
“without water” we seek to avoid the possible confusion that occurred with the naming convention in ecoinvent v1 & v2
where the name of this da- taset was “sodium hydroxide, 50% in H2O”).
The concentrations applied in the ecoinvent database are those typically found as commercial concen- trations. The
concentration of the product has an influence on the manufacturing requirements (purifi- cation) as well as on the
transport service requirements (double the amount of transport work is re-

quired for a 25% caustic soda dissolved in water as compared to a 50% caustic soda dissolved in wa- ter). To allow the
user to model other concentrations than the default, the concentration may be de- fined as a variable, and the water
content and other related inputs and outputs expressed in relation to this variable.
Treatment activities provide services to other activities to treat their material outputs, in particular wastes. Since
the service and the input are intimately linked, the service output is named by the treat- ed material, and the exchange
is negative. Thus, the activity “treatment of blast furnace gas” has as its determining (reference) product -1 MJ “blast
furnace gas” and as a by-product 0.06 kWh “electricity, high voltage” . In this way, it is ensured that the output
“blast furnace gas” from the pig iron produc- tion can link to its treatment process.
Market activities, production mixes, supply mixes, export and re-export activities have the same prod- ucts as inputs
and outputs, e.g. “market for barley grain” has “barley grain” as input and “barley grain” as output. For graphical
presentations, the terms (consumption mix) for markets, (treatment mix) for markets for treatments, (production mix) for
production mixes, (supply mix) for supply mix- es, (export) for export activities, and (re-export) for re-export
activities may be used as additions to the name, but are not formally part of the product name in the ecoSpold2 data
format, where the in- formation that the product output is a consumption mix, production mix, supply mix, export or re-
export is carried in the separate field 115 specialActivityType.
Special naming conventions for correction datasets are provided in Chapter11.7.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The naming conventions are more stringent in some as- pects. The naming convention for dissolved chemicals has been revised. The naming convention for treatment services is changed.]

9.4 Elementary exchanges / Exchanges from and to the
environment
Naming of elementary exchanges takes pattern from the work of the SETAC working group “Data availability and data
quality” (de Beaufort-Langeveld et al. 2003; Hischier et al. 2001). Sum formulas and IUPAC names are recommended when
new substance names are proposed to be added to the list. CAS numbers are required, when available. Names of elementary
exchanges are spelled with Capital
starting letter, i.e. “Chlorine”, not “chlorine”, as opposed to names of intermediate exchanges. The name for an element
or a compound is the same for all environmental compartments.
Binding forms and oxidation states are considered in the name. The toxicology of chemical elements is dependent on the
oxidation state. Some examples may illustrate this. Chlorine (oxidation 0) is a tox- ic gas. Chloride (oxidation = -1)
is essential for the nutrition of human beings, but it might be toxic in high doses for animals and plants in rivers and
lakes. Chromate (oxidation = 6) emitted to air is car- cinogenic for humans when inhaled. Other forms of chromium (
oxidation = 0, 2 or 3) are not. That is why the oxidation state of chemical elements and ions is considered in the
description of the elemen- tary exchange. Different oxidation states (e.g. chromium, chromites, chromate) are
distinguished in the list of elementary exchanges.
Quite often chemical compounds are known under different names. A list of synonyms is available in the database.
The information provided onhttp://www.chemfinder.comis used as the default source of information for the definition of
further elementary exchange names.

9.4.1 Land transformation and occupation
The differentiation between transformation and occupation is reflected in the naming of land use ele- mentary exchanges.
It takes pattern from the naming proposals of a Dutch project (Lindeijer & Alfers 2001):
Occupation, class, subtype
Transformation, from class of occupation
Transformation, to class of occupation
The different levels of details in describing the land use class are separated by commas, e.g.:
Occupation, annual crop
Occupation, annual crop, non-irrigated
Occupation, annual crop, non-irrigated, intensive
The highest possible level of information detail is always used and recorded in the inventories.
Names and definitions of the different land use classes are provided in Chapter6.7.

9.4.2 Environmental compartments
Elementary exchanges in the ecoinvent database are identified by an exchange name (e.g. “Carbon di- oxide, fossil”), its
unit, a compartment and a sub-compartment.
Table 9.1shows the compartments and sub-compartments which are used in the ecoinvent database. Compartment and
sub-compartment names have a lower case initial letter. Compartments and sub- compartments can only be added and edited
centrally via the ecoinvent database administrator.
Compartments describe the different environmental compartments, like air, water, soil and natural re- source.
Sub-compartments within these compartments make further distinctions which may be rele- vant for the subsequent impact
assessment step.
The compartments "air", "soil", "water" and “direct human uptake” describe the receiving compart- ment and are used
for (direct) pollutants emissions, whereas the compartment "resource" is used for all kinds of resource consumption. For
instance, water consumption is recorded as an input in the compartment / subcompartment "resource / in water". Land
transformation and occupation is recorded as an input as well, in the compartment / subcompartment "resource / land".
Emissions directly to bi- omass are included in the compartment “soil” .
As recommended in USETOX < http://www.usetox.org/>, the border between urban and non-urban ((high and low population
density)   is the U.S. Census Bureau “urban area” definition <http://www.census.gov/geo/www/ua/ua_2k.html> of 400
persons per km2. Approx. 50% of the glob- al population lives in urban (high population density) areas. In establishing
the population density for a particular point, an area of 12 km2 (2 km radius from the point) is applied.
Contaminants in food, medicine, hygiene products and clothing are described as an emission at the point of human uptake.
Until then, the contaminants are included as properties of the products.
For some subcategories a temporal differentiation was introduced. Emissions from landfills take place over a long time
period after the waste placement. Emissions which take place 100 and more years af- ter waste placement are named "
long-term".
Outlook: The issue of how best to include long-term emissions is currently under consideration.
The subcompartment “agricultural” for soil pollutants is only used for releases on agricultural soil that is used or
suitable for the production of food, fodder products, or animal feed, which enters the human food chain.

Table 9.1 Compartments and subcompartments for elementary exchanges in the ecoinvent database

Compart- ment SubCompartment Definition Assigned in general to
g!L
(on在bn在 在o)  uou-nLpgu g!L oL
LLo山 p!ap 2在gck2 E山!22!ou !u gLeg2 M!在p g bobnIg在!ou qeu2!在入 pe- IoM 寸00 beL2ou2 beL k山s oL LLo山 2在gck2 p!
apeL
在pgu )00 山 匕e2onLce ex在Lgc在!ou, LoLe2在L入, gaL!cnI在nLe,
p入qLo eueLa入, M!uq boMeL, cogI guq uncIegL boMeL bIgu在2, 山nu!c!bgI IguqL!II2, Mg2在eMg在eL 在Leg在山eu在, Ioua-q!
2在guce 在Lgu2boL在2, 2p!bb!ua
IoM bobnIg在!ou qeu- 2!在入, Ioua-在eL山 E山!22!ou Mp!cp 在gke bIgce !u 在pe Ln在nLe, >)00 入egL2 gL在eL 在pe 2在gL在 oL
在pe gc在!^!在入 E山!22!ou2 LLo山 nLgu!n山 山!II 在g!I!ua2
IoMeL 2在Lg在o2bpeLe + nbbeL 在Lobo- 2bpeLe E山!22!ou LLo山 g!LbIgue2 V!L 在Lgu2boL在, cLn!2!ua
nLpgu g!L cIo2e 在o aLonuq E山!22!ou peIoM )00 山e在Le2 !u gLeg2 M!在p g bobnIg在!ou qeu2!在入 gpo^e 寸00 beL2ou2 beL
k山s Iuqn2在L入, o!I guq ag2 boMeL bIgu在2, 山gunLgc- 在nL!ua, pon2epoIq2, 山nu!c!bgI Mg2在e !uc!ueLg- 在!ou, IocgI
在LgLL!c, cou2在Lnc在!ou gc在!^!在!e2
!uqooL E山!22!ou !u2!qe cIo2eq pn!Iq!ua2 guq on在2!qe oL qeq!cg在eq Ln山e pooq2 M!在p !u在gke 2beeq >0,Q 山\2 n2e 2在gae
oL bLoqnc在2 LoL !uqooL n2e
nu2bec!L!eq OuI入 n2eq !L uo 2bec!L!c !uLoL山g在!ou g^g!IgpIe
ug在nLgI
Le2onLce
(!ubn在 oL)
!u g!L dg在nLgI Le2onLce !u g!L, e.a. gLaou, cgLpou q!ox- !qe n2eq LoL cgLpou nb在gke !u p!o山g22 guq e2 bLoqnceq p入 g!
L 2ebgLg在!ou ag2-
p!o在!c B!oaeu!c Le2onLce, e.a. Mooq
!u aLonuq dg在nLgI Le2onLce !u 2o!I e.a. oLe2: IguqL!II ^oI-
n山e
Iguq 「guq occnbg在!ou guq Iguq 在Lgu2LoL山g在!ou
!u Mg在eL dg在nLgI Le2onLce !u Mg在eL, e.a. 山gaue2!n山, Mg- 在eL
2o!I
(on在bn在 在o)  gaL!cnI在nLgI E山!22!ou 在o 2o!I 在pg在 !2 n2eq LoL oL !2 2n!在gpIe LoL 在pe bLoqnc在!ou oL gaL!cnI在nLgI
bLoqnc在2 在pg在 eu在eL 在pe pn山gu Looq cpg!u. VaL!cnI在nLe, gaL!cnI在nLgI p!o山g22 bLoqnc在!ou

LoLe2在L入 E山!22!ou 在o 2o!I 在pg在 !2 n2eq LoL bIgu在 bLoqnc- 在!ou (Mooq, LeueMgpIe LgM 山g在eL!gI2), pn在 Mp!cp !2
uo在 n2eq oL 2n!在gpIe LoL bLoqnc在!ou oL gaL!cnI- 在nLgI bLoqnc在2 在pg在 eu在eL 在pe pn山gu Looq cpg!u   (beL山gueu在
LoLe2在 Iguq, 山gLa!ugI Iguq2)
上oLe2在L入
!uqn2在L!gI E山!22!ou 在o 2o!I n2eq LoL !uqn2在L入, 山gunLgc在nL- !ua, Mg2在e 山gugae山eu在 guq !uLLg2在Lnc在nLe
Iuqn2在L入, Iguq-LgL山!ua oL Mg2在e2, pn!I在-nb Iguq
nu2bec!L!eq OuI入 n2eq !L uo 2bec!L!c !uLoL山g在!ou g^g!IgpIe
Mg在eL
(on在bn在 在o)  aLonuq- CLonuqMg在eL Mp!cp M!II ae在 !u cou在gc在 M!在p 在pe p!o2bpeLe gL在eL 2o山e 在!山e
aLonuq-, Ioua-在eL山 E山!22!ou Mp!cp 在gke bIgce !u 在pe Ln在nLe, >)00 入egL2 gL在eL 在pe 2在gL在 oL 在pe gc在!^!在入
「oua-在eL山 e山!22!ou2 LLo山 IguqL!II2
ocegu Ocegu, 2eg guq 2gI在入 Igke OLL2poLe MoLk2, o^eL2eg2 2p!b 在Lgu2boL在2
2nLLgce Mg在eL 匕!^eL guq Igke D!2cpgLae oL eLLIneu在2 LLo山 Mg2在eMg在eL 在Leg在山eu在 Lgc!I!在!e2
nu2bec!L!eq OuI入 n2eq !L uo 2bec!L!c !uLoL山g在!ou g^g!IgpIe
q!Lec在 pn- 山gu nb- 在gke (on在- bn在 在o)
nu2bec!L!eq Cou在g山!ug在!ou !u bLoqnc在2 n2eq LoL oLgI !u在gke oL M!在p 2k!u cou在gc在 上ooq bLoqnc在2 guq 山eq!c!ue g在
在pe bo!u在 oL pn山gu !u在gke, p入a!eue bLoqnc在2 guq cIo在p!ua g在 在pe n2e 2在gae
ecouo山!c (!ubn在 oL)  bL!山gL入 bLoqnc在!ou Lgc在oL 「gponL co2在, ue在 在gx, ue在 obeLg在!ua 2nLbIn2, Leu在 VII ue在
exbeuq!在nLe2 exceb在 在po2e bg!q LoL aooq2 guq 2eL^!ce2 bnLcpg2eq
2oc!gI
(!ubn在 oL)  nu2bec!L!eq Cpguae !u 2oc!gI bLe22nLe VII ex在eLugI!在!e2 gLLec在!ua pn山gu MeILgLe guq\oL bLoqnc在!^!在入,
uo在 eI2eMpeLe co^eLeq

[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: Category/Subcategory (version 1&2) has changed name to Compartment/Subcompartment. Text description on emissions to soil, agricultural, has been brought in line with actual practice in ecoinvent 2 (biomass production on agricultural land has emissions to soil, agricultural). Resource has been changed to Natural resource. The sub-compartments Lake and River have been merged to Surface water. Some definitions have been made more precise. New com- partments have been added for indoor air, direct human uptake, economic and social exchanges.]

9.5 Synonyms
Synonyms may be added for all names of activities and exchanges. We seek to make the synonyms lists as complete as
possible.
Additional advice for data providers:
Synonyms are different names for the same item, not instances of the item. For example, sheep husbandry is a synonym for
sheep production, while animal production and Merino production are not synonyms, but respec- tively a wider class of
activities and a specific instance referring to a particular kind of sheep.

9.6 Units
The units shown in Table 9.2 (always in English language) are used. As far as practical, SI-units are applied, with the
SI-prefixes shown in Table 9.4.
Exceptions are:
The traditional measure ton, with the specification metric ton (= 1000 kg = 1 Mg), when used in
the combination metric ton*km.
The traditional area measure ar (a), as in hectar (ha), which should not be confused with the SI-
prefix atto- or the Latin abbreviation for year.
Popular units for time (year, month, week, day, hour), written out fully, since multiples of the SI-
unit seconds (s) appears awkward.
Ideally, datasets that do not have a material output should not be provided in mass units, although this may sometimes
be the only relevant function that can be referred to. Especially for datasets trans- ferred from ecoinvent version 2,
there are still some datasets that have the output of 1 kg, although this refers only to “processing of 1 kg of metal”,
not to the metal material itself. We strive to rename the functional unit of these datasets whenever possible.
Currencies are reported in ISO three-digit code. As currencies change values over time, it is necessary to apply a
subscript to indicate the year that the currency refers to, e.g. EUR2000 or EUR2003 . For large numbers, the
SI-prefixes (see Table 9.4) have been used, e.g. MEUR = 1’000’000 EUR, GEUR = 1’000’000’000 EUR. Currencies are
converted with the International Monetary Fund mid-year SDR exchange rates.

Table 9.2 Units used for activities and products

Unit Term Usage examples
m square metre Surface treatments, buildings, sites, boards, plates, re- ception surfaces,
ha hectare (hecto-are) = 100 a = 10000
2 agricultural working activities
m2*year Roads, ventilation systems
kg/s
l/hour
MW kilogram per second
litres per hour
mega Watt = MJ/s = 3.6 kWh/s Capacity of weight
Capacity of volume
Capacity of energy conversion
kg/l kilogram per litre Density
m metre Cables, belts, chimneys, ducts, tape, welding, wells
metric ton*km person*km metric ton*kilometre (Mg*km)
person-kilometre Transport services. The term vkm or vehicle-km (syn- onymous to km) is not applied
m*year metre-year Roads, railway track
unit unit, piece, number Infrastructure (exceptions: kg machine, m2 or m3 build- ing), agricultural activities involving
livestock units etc.
kWh kilo Watt hour Electricity
MJ mega Joule Final energy in boilers, useful energy at boilers, cooling energy
hour hour = 3600 s Usage time of equipment
year year (annum)  Multi-product activities for the total production in an ar- ea or of a facility
l litre = dm3 Liquid products
m cubic metre Concrete and wood, wastewater, slurry, radioactive wastes, buildings; for natural gas, biogas, compogas,
town gas: normal cubic metre = cubic metre of gas at 15 °C; 101.325 kPa (ISO 13443)
kg kilogram Building materials, basic chemicals, wastes (non radio- active), energy carriers from production to regional
storage, (excl. electricity, natural gas), liquefied gases, tap water, decarbonised and deionised water, agricul- tural
machinery, "kg SWU" (separative work unit) used for enrichment of uranium

The units (basically SI units) used to describe elementary exchanges are shown in Table 9.3.

Table 9.3 Units used for elementary exchanges

Unit Description Type of exchange
kg kilogram All chemical substances
kBq kilo Becquerel Radionuclide releases
m cubic metre Water as a resource, Gases as a resource; normal cubic metre = cubic metre of gas at 15 °C; 101.325 kPa (
ISO 13443)
m square metre Land transformation
m2*year square metre year Land occupation

Table 9.4 SI-prefixes

b be在g-  ).0E+)Q
」 在eLg-  ).0E+)s
C a!ag-  ).0E+?
W 山eag-  ).0E+e
k k!Io-  ).0E+3
p pec在o-  ).0E+s

[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: Several changes in unit spellings. In ecoinvent v2, the units GVE and MSP were used: „ 1 GVE entspricht dem Futterverzehr und dem Anfall von Mist und Gülle einer 650 kg schweren Kuh in der Schweiz“ . 1 MSP is 0.15 GVE. These units are now changed to „unit” and explained in the datasets. Mass units avoided for service products (e.g. rather 1 metre wire-drawing for steel, than wiredrawing of 1 kg of steel; using e.g. the extent of transport, transfor- mation, shape, distortion, reduction, rather than the weight of the material treated). In version 2, some datasets also have outputs of kg of material removed (e.g. by drilling) and inputs of the material “lost” by this operation, which implies that to avoid double counting, the activity they are inputs to must have an input of an untreated object with the same weight as the treated object. Such datasets need to be changed so that the treatment activity has the full input of the material treated and an output of a treated object and the material removed. This should preferably be done in consultation with the orig- inal data provider and/or editor.]

9.7 Classifications
All activities are classified according to the ISIC classification  (Rev. 4)
,  <http://unstats.un.org /unsd/cr/registry/>, with some additional sub-divisions necessary for ecoinvent. The
additional classes added by ecoinvent (listed in Table 9.5) are sub-divisions, using as far as possible the explanatory
language from the original ISIC class.

Table 9.5 Additions to the ISIC Rev. 4 classification of activities, for use in the ecoinvent database

Class Name
)?g 「!dn!q guq ag2eon2 LneI2 LLo山 p!o山g22
s0))g WgunLgc在nLe oL uncIegL LneI2
s寸s0g e山eI在!ua guq LeL!u!ua oL nLgu!n山
sS)0g WgunLgc在nLe oL eIec在L!c 山o在oL2, aeueLg在oL2, LoL I!dn!q LneI2
s8))g WgunLgc在nLe oL eua!ue2 guq 在nLp!ue2 LoL I!dn!q LneI2, exceb在 g!LcLgL在, ^ep!cIe guq c入cIe eua!ue2
s8)Qg WgunLgc在nLe oL LnLugce2 guq po!IeL2 LoL I!dn!q LneI2
s8)Qp WgunLgc在nLe oL beL山gueu在 山onu在 uou-eIec在L!c pon2epoIq peg在!ua edn!b山eu在
30))g Cou2在Lnc在!ou oL qL!II!ua bIg在LoL山2
3Q)0g EIec在L!c boMeL aeueLg在!ou pg2eq ou I!dn!q LneI2
3Q)0p EIec在L!c boMeL aeueLg在!ou, bpo在o^oI在g!c
3Q30g e在eg山 guq g!L couq!在!ou!ua 2nbbI入 pg2eq ou I!dn!q LneI2
3Q30p eoIgL coIIec在oL2 obeLg在!ou
寸)00g Cou2在Lnc在!ou oL Lgc在oL入 pn!Iq!ua2 LoL 在pe 山e在gI !uqn2在L入
寸ss0g Cou2在Lnc在!ou oL n在!I!在入 bLo读ec在2 LoL eIec在L!c!在入 bLoqnc在!ou, exceb在 LoL I!dn!q LneI2
寸ss0p Cou2在Lnc在!ou oL n在!I!在入 bLo读ec在2 LoL eIec在L!c!在入 bLoqnc在!ou, LoL I!dn!q LneI2
寸s?0g Cou2在Lnc在!ou oL !uLLg2在Lnc在nLe LoL be在LoIen山 LeL!u!ua guq q!2在L!pn在!ou
寸3ssg Iu2在gIIg在!ou oL 2oIgL coIIec在oL 2入2在e山2

The classification is used to identify the responsible ecoinvent editor (see Chapter 12.2) and can be used to create
residual datasets for an industry, relative to data from national statistics (see Weidema 2013).
For products, the optional CPC Ver. 2 classification is recommended < http://unstats.un.org/unsd/>.
For datasets transferred from version 2 of the ecoinvent database, the activity classification of version 2 is applied
as an additional classification, but this classification system is no longer maintained by the ecoinvent Centre.
New, optional classification systems can be added on request to the ecoinvent database administrator.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: New classification systems for activities. Option to add more classifications for both products and activities. The ISIC and CPC classifications are available in the classification master file.]

9.8 Tags
One or more tags can be added to any activity and to any exchange. Tags can be seen as an optional, user-defined
classification system, to group specific activities or exchanges together.
Some pre-defined tags for datasets, used in the ecoinvent database, are listed in Table 9.6.

Table 9.6 Pre-defined tags for datasets, for use in the ecoinvent database

Name Comment
branded dataset with logo dataset for a named brand or from a named enterprise, with logo
branded dataset without logo dataset for a named brand or from a named enterprise, without logo
complementary product product needed for the proper functioning of a main product, but not part of this product, e.g.
packaging or maintenance
consumption adjustment dataset representing a change in consumption as a result of market con- straints
goods transport dataset representing a goods transport activity
household activity dataset representing an activity taking place in private households
packaging
quality difference adjustment dataset representing downstream changes due to quality differences in products on the same
market
single enterprise data dataset representing one single, anonymous enterprise
with true value dataset for which true value properties are defined (reserved; added by database)

Additional advice for data providers:
Tags can be added individually to an activity or an exchange. If you wish to add the same tag to many datasets or
exchanges (or several, similar tags to many datasets or exchanges), this may be too cumbersome a procedure. For this
situation, contact the ecoinvent database administration for a “fast track” procedure.
[Changes relative to ecoinvent version 2: The option to add tags is new.]

9.9 Geographical locations
The ecoinvent master file for geographical locations contains all countries, the continents Asia and Europe, the UN
regions and subregions, European and North American electricity grids and some

economic regions (e.g. North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)).
All locations are described in the Keyhole Markup Language (KML), an OGC standard for geospatial data used in GIS
software including Google Earth. More detailed information on the ecoinvent master geographies files is available in a
separate ecoinvent report.
The global geography (GLO) is used for global datasets, and has no KML description of its shape.
The designation ROW (Rest-Of-World) is a dynamic concept that exists in the situation when both a global dataset and one
or more non-global datasets are available for the same activity, time period, and macro-economic scenario. The
definition is specific to each activity and depends on what defined geographies are available for the specific activity
name. The Rest-Of-World dataset is defined as the difference between the global reference dataset and the datasets with
defined geographies.
Additional advice for data providers:
New geographical locations, either point sources, line sources or area sources can be defined by the data provid- ers on
the ecoinvent geography website:http://geography.ecoinvent.org/. They can be added to the database with the following
procedure:

1. Geographic metadata such as the name is entered in the dataset in the EcoEditor software.
2. The spatial definition of the location is then created on the ecoinvent geographies
   website: http://geography.ecoinvent.org. If the new location is already available in a common geospatial format, this
   can also be mailed to the geographies editor:geography@ecoinvent.org
3. The ecoinvent geography editor performs a quality assessment of the submitted data, and asks for revi- sions from the
   data provider if needed. The ecoinvent geography editor will also edit shapes to conform to boundaries that already
   exist in the database, e.g. political or geographical boundaries. The geography editor uploads the final geography
   spatial definition to the ecoinvent database.
4. The data provider is notified that their geographical shapes are ready in the database, and the datasets that use
   them can be submitted to the normal dataset review process.

Since the ecoinvent database does not allow overlapping datasets, adding a dataset (whether point-, line-, or area-
based), which is fully located within the geographical area of an existing dataset for the same activity, is effec-
tively a disaggregation of the existing dataset, and requires that the existing dataset is modified to represent the
residual of the original dataset, in terms of geography, production volume, and otherwise. The geography for the
residual dataset will be produced by the ecoinvent geography editor in Step 3.
In addition to the preferred ecoinvent website,http://geography.ecoinvent.org, KML files for new geographic shapes can
be defined in a dedicated GIS program such as ArcGIS or QuantumGIS, or in a consumer program or web page such as online
maps or Google Earth. KML definitions should meet the following criteria:
New geographies should not duplicate geographic areas already present in the ecoinvent master geographies
file.
Composite geographies (such as a union of several countries) should be derived from the definitions of the
original geographies already present in the ecoinvent master geographies file.
Borders that are already present for other geographies in the ecoinvent master geographies file should be
copied from this file, to avoid small deviations for the same border in different geographies.
Coordinates should only be defined to eight digits past the decimal point.
All geographic shapes should be valid, as defined by the OGC KML standard.
While the KML format allows the addition of additional metadata, such as text and pictures, all such metadata shall be
removed for inclusion in ecoinvent, and data providers should only include the geographic shape defini- tions to be
included in geography files.

9.10 Persons
Names and contact details on all persons referred to in ecoinvent datasets are centrally collected and managed in a
master file. A name and an e-mail are the only required fields, but adding further ad- dress information is encouraged.

9.11 Other master files
Master files for the ecoinvent database are also available for default properties and parameters. De- fault properties
include the elemental composition (Al_content, etc.), water content, density, dry mass, exergy, lifetime, etc.
Other master files are available for scenarios (see Chapter4.2.3), system models (Chapter4.14), lan- guages (Chapter8.2)
, and sources (Chapter7.5). Only the latter can be amended by the data providers directly. The others are edited via the
database administrator only.
Master files are used for validating datasets (see Chapter 12.1) and to create look-ups for the ecoEdi- tor software (so
that previous entries can be selected rather than created anew).

9.12 Variables
Variable names must start with a character (a-z). Variables may contain characters, numbers and un- derscores (_).
Variable names are not case sensitive (calorific_Value equals Calorific_value) .
